The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
INJURIES have forced Highlanders’ central defenders Andrew Mbeba and Andrew Tandi out of Sunday’s Chibuku Super Cup tie against Bulawayo City at Barbourfields Stadium. Their absence will force Bosso coach Mandla Mpofu to field a makeshift defence similar to the one he deployed against Chicken Inn last Sunday. With central defensive stalwart Peter Muduhwa only available when the transfer window opens next month, Mbongeni Ndlovu looks set to again partner with new boy Crispen Ncube, while Charlton Siamalonga, who replaced Tandi against the Gamecocks last week, will play right-back and Pritchard Mpelele feels the left-back position. According to Mpofu, Mpelele produced a man-of-the-match performance, while Ncube and Ndlovu’s partnership also impressed him. “I did not have a problem with Mbongeni having to shift into central defence because he has played in that position before. l was worried about Ncube because l did not know how he was going to respond, but he did very well. I told him to do the basics and he did just that. I saw a lot of dimensions from him,” said Mpofu. Mpofu believes he will face a selection headache when all players are available. Bosso have not had a full-strength squad due to a combination of uncleared players and injuries. Highlanders are second in Group B with four points, while Bulawayo City are bottom of the table with one point. Mpofu has dubbed Sunday’s encounter a catch-up game. “Bulawayo City want to win the game so that they can catch up with us. On the other hand, we want to win so that we move away from the other teams. It is not going to be easy, but again from the first game we played to our strengths against Chicken Inn and hope we continue to improve against City,” said Mpofu. His major worry is the strikers’ inability to find the back of the net. Bosso have scored just a single goal in the two matches they have played. “Looking at all aspects of the game, l think we have done well in defence and midfield, but we need to work around the clock to fix the final third. You need to get goals in order to win games and my worry right now is getting goals and it’s something we are working on at training and l hope when we meet City, we will get goals,” he said. 