The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
THE sixth edition of the United Kingdom Bukalanga Arts Festival that is held annually in the United Kingdom is set to revive the culture of the Kalanga people who are largely found in the Matabeleland South province. Having faced a blow last year due to the ongoing pandemic after the event was cancelled, organisers have vowed to put up a fete that lives up to its billing as the event will bring together, Zimbabweans in the diaspora and locally, to celebrate and showcase their culture. The event is set to be held on July 10 at Nottingham near a village called Plumtree, which the UK diasporas say brings memories of their hometown. The festival is set to promote the Kalanga language and culture through a series of vibrant performances that include poetry, traditional music and dance. Mostly rhumba and gospel, genres which are favourites in Matabeleland South will be played. Speaking from the UK, United Kingdom Bukalanga Arts Festival organiser Difa WaJapi Dube said the event is set to be held physically and also virtually as they want to include every Kalanga-speaking person from all the corners of the world. “Preparations for the hosting of the event are at an advanced stage. The gathering is usually held at Nottingham, close to a place called Plumtree which makes it feel closer to home. But due to the pandemic, it might be done virtually to ensure we commemorate this day. “Through this gathering, we’re trying to remind each other of our roots and tribe, especially for the children so that they know more about where they come from. “Whenever we host these gatherings, we usually have speeches from the elders and stories which inspire people to be proud of their tribe,” said Difa. He said the event also seeks to source funds from the diaspora and other well-wishers for projects meant at uplifting the villages they come from. Difa added that the event also celebrates Kalanga natives who are doing well in different sectors. “The event is held annually in the United Kingdom, Australia, South Africa and Zimbabwe with the main objective being to raise funds for development initiatives back home and build relationships with other Zimbabweans who are in the diaspora. “It’s been six years since we started these gatherings, celebrating being Kalangas and we’re still going forward with the celebrations. It’s a good thing that we’re doing this because it gives other tribes opportunities to get to know us, our language, songs, food and other things better,” he said. “On this day, we’ll also promote businesses and expose opportunities. “We have Kalangas who are lawyers, health workers and social workers. In case one of us needs these kinds of services, it’s better to look for a person who speaks your language and who understands your culture and the situation. So it’s important that we know each other and our areas of professional expertise so that we can be able to help each other in certain crises without being made fun of on social media,” said Difa. — @mthabisi_mthire