The Chronicle Lingani Nyika, Victoria Falls Reporter
MATABELELAND North province would leverage on its vast natural resources to transform its economy with mining investments expected to unlock more job opportunities. The Minister of State for Provincial Affairs, Richard Moyo, said this during the Chamber of Mines of Zimbabwe Annual Conference, which ended in Victoria Falls last Friday. “My province is focusing on mining sector providing the impetus for economic growth as it leverages the geological endowment in my province,” said the minister. “As you may be aware, Matabeleland North is expected to play a pivotal role in the implementation of National Development Strategy (NDS1) and ultimately feed into the attainment of the country’s vision of being an upper middle-income economy by 2030.” Matabeleland North province is the hub for coal to energy value chain investments, which will unlock up to US$1 billion under the coal and hydrocarbons focus. As such, Minister Moyo said his province was geared to contribute towards realisation of an upper middle-income vision by 2030. The province is already focused on drafting a development plan that aligns all economic projects to NDS1. Under this drive, he said various mineral resources will be exploited to impact positively in the entire economy. “Mat North has great potential to contribute significantly towards achieving US$12 billion vision for the mining sector by 2023. As a province we are making efforts to increase the capacity of coke and coal production for existing collieries,” he said. President Emmerson Mnangagwa officially opened the convention on Friday and pledged increased Government support for the mining sector. Despite the Covid-19 disruption, the mining sector is pushing towards attainment of a US$12 billion milestone by 2023. Last year President Mnangagwa visited several mining investments in Matabeleland North, which are at different stages of implementation. “Significant progress has been made so far by the coal and hydrocarbons projects, which are under our periodical assessment,” said Minister Moyo. He called for increased value addition and beneficiation saying the mining resources are finite hence the need to diversify. — @NyikaLingani