The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
ZIFA Southern Region Division One League clubs have rebelled against the board and refused to pay affiliation fees over $300 000 in sitting allowances claimed by board members in 2020 when no physical meetings took place due to Covid-19 lockdown restrictions. In a petition signed by 14 clubs and left at the Zifa Southern Region offices on Tuesday, they said there was no proof any meeting took place, as no minutes or resolutions were forwarded to the clubs. “Meals, accommodation and travel allowances need to be explained. What was the purpose of these journeys and to where, when no physical meetings were allowed due to (the) Covid-19 lockdown? “We believe the funds were channelled towards wrong priorities; hence clubs are now forced to pay huge amounts to cover the void. It is against this background that these financials in their entirety cannot pass the test,” the clubs wrote in the petition. They said there were anomalies in the financial statement presented at the annual general meeting, as certain expenses do not appear and expenditure notes were different yet payments on all copies tallied. The financial statement did not include the budget and other copies didn’t include a schedule of accounts for both payables and receivables. Without an audit report, the clubs said they had lost confidence in the board. As a result, the clubs said they had resolved not to pay the 2021 affiliation fees the board pegged at US$2  000 until dates for the new season are confirmed. The clubs fear losing money for nothing like what happened last year when they paid affiliation fees of US$2 500 in full and no football activity took place. They said their sponsors were demanding updates relating to the restart of football, with some considering pulling out due to lack of clarity. “Fifa provided funds that were meant for football resumption and the (Southern Region) executive committee made purchases of office equipment using Fifa funds meant for resumption of football. This is in the chairman’s report,” complained the clubs. Zifa had set May 30 as the deadline for payment of affiliation fees and May 31 as the last day for registration of players, and only three clubs complied, while the rest ignored the deadline. Andrew Tapela, Zifa Southern Region chairman, said they’re surprised that the clubs mutinied when their concerns were addressed at the AGM. “It is not a petition per se, but 14 clubs have raised issues of concern, which border around affiliation and they also want to know when football will restart. All these are issues that were discussed in the chairman’s report at the AGM. “They noted a few errors in our reports, but they should have raised those at the meeting. They also speak about communication issues, but all that was addressed and as it is some of those signatories haven’t even sent us the names of Covid-19 compliance officers as per our request so that they start training,” Tapela said. – @ZililoR