The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent TODAY, the country is in a celebratory mode as we are celebrating a musical legend, Alick Macheso who has turned 53 years. For decades, his songs, most that have turned out to be big hits that include MaDube, Charakupa, Sarah, Petunia, Amakebhoyi and Freeman’s Ngaibake in which he featured, have been making us dance as if they were released yesterday. He has remained humble over the years while playing a fatherly role to most up-and-coming artistes, something that most admire about him. Interestingly, the sungura maestro does not seem to be aging as he still looks youthful and is very energetic. If it were not for the Covid-19 pandemic, his fans would have been guaranteed of an unending show as Macheso is one guy who will rock you on stage till you tire and drop. At most of his shows that have ended after 5AM, he has been the last man standing. To celebrate this special day, his fans and most artistes have been flooding social media with birthday messages. Artistes have taken time to show appreciation of the role Macheso has played and among these is Gwanda artiste, Master Zhoe who thanked Macheso for paving the way for them. “Happy birthday to a man who made us dream and see possibilities. Salute to the Sungura King, we love you mudhara. From all of us at Master Zhoe music.” Wrote Nicholas Zakaria: “Alick Macheso, your talent is the greatest asset and it’s an honour to have worked with you. You are the student who dwarfed the master and I am so proud of you. Happy birthday mfumu yanga, mulungu akudalitseni. “Here’s to more wins, more hits, successes and long life.” Posted Tryson Chimbetu: “To Alick Macheso, the man who mentored me, I have great respect for you mudhara. Rambai Makachengetwa.” Music great, Mukanya also wished Macheso well through a video. On his part, Macheso thanked all those who have been wishing him well. To show appreciation, he said he will be spending the day with children in Zimunya, Manicaland province. “I have seen no greater love than you are giving me today. Because it’s my birthday, I am spending the day with children in Zimunya. Thank you Zimbabwe, Africa and the world for showing me love and appreciation on my birthday,” posted Macheso on his Facebook page. He said he was grateful that people were giving him flowers while he could still smell them. “Maruva anoda kupiwa uchiri mupenyu, ekuzoisa paguva aya anogona kutodywiwa namadhongi. Ndinotenda zvikurusa.” From the Chronicle Showbiz team, we say happy 53rd birthday Baba Shero, continue blessing us nemagitare and Borrowdale dances. – @mthabisi_mthire 