The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
Highlanders 1-0 Bulawayo City HIGHLANDERS players put aside their inhouse problems which saw them embarking on a three-day strike over a pay rise to register their second win in the Chibuku Super Cup by beating Bulawayo City at Barbourfields Stadium yesterday. Captain Ariel Sibanda converted from the penalty spot in the 85th minute to ensure Bosso remain on course to defending the cup. Striker Washington Navaya, who scored Highlanders’ first goal of the tournament when they beat Bulawayo Chiefs 1-0 last month, was brought down in the penalty box by City defender Douglas Sibanda in the 81st minute and the municipal side’s protestations led to a four-minute stoppage. When the spot kick was eventually taken, Sibanda held his nerves to score. It was a sweet victory for the Bosso players considering that they didn’t train on Tuesday, Thursday and Friday as they demanded a salary increase. Bosso controlled the game and put City on the backfoot for the better part of the game and could have won by a wider margin had their strikers been sharper in front of goal. “Derbies are always difficult. We tried our best, we said to ourselves let us put our problems aside and focus on the game. We know the Chibuku Super Cup has lots of money which we need and so we had to focus. I took responsibility and converted the penalty, and I’m happy for our fans and the players. From now on, we’ll take it game by game and see how it goes,” said Sibanda. Highlanders could have drawn first blood in the fifth minute but Ray Lunga’s cheeky chip was brilliantly saved by City keeper Bhekimpilo Ncube. Navaya then fluffed a brilliant scoring chance in the 20th minute by shooting straight into Ncube’s hands after being set-up by Lunga.
In the 28th minute, City’s Crispen Machisi weaved his way past a cluster of Bosso players before crossing a tantalising ball that eluded every player and went out for a goal kick. City hardly troubled Bosso and in the second half the Bulawayo giants continued to dominate but failed to convert chances they created.
Philani Ncube, the City coach, was happy with his team’s performance despite the loss. “I’m happy with the project, we’re in the right direction. We conceded a goal in the 85th minute today, and in the first game we conceded a goal in the 40th minute. We congratulate Highlanders, whether it was a penalty or not, we need to respect the referee’s decision,” said Ncube. Bosso coach Mandla Mpofu said: “It was a game where we came here with a lot of problems, a game where as a coach we came without tactical work, a game which we didn’t prepare for as much as I wanted as a coach. We didn’t train on Tuesday, Thursday and Friday, and had a light training session yesterday (Saturday). What the boys said to me after Saturday training was we’re done with our problems; we want to focus on our problems after the game. They said we want to fight for you coach, we want to fight for the team and they did exactly that. “We did well in the first 15 minutes and took control but unfortunately got tired thereafter. In the second half we were strong and Navaya could have gotten one or two before the penalty. We’re giving ourselves high chances of progressing. We need to focus on the next game.” Teams
Highlanders: Ariel Sibanda, Charlton Siamalonga, Pritchard Mphelele, Crispen Ncube, Mbongeni Ndlovu, Nqobizitha Masuku, Ray Lunga, Adrian Silla, Washington Navaya, Muziwakhe Dlamini (Bukhosi Sibanda 60th minute), Divine Mhindirira
Chicken Inn: Bhekimpilo Ncube, Lewis Ncube, Wilfred Munhuwei, Vincent Moyo, Douglas Sibanda, Dominic Mukandi, Melikhaya Ncube, Crispen Machisi (Arlton Ndlovu 88th minute), Eddie Nkhulungo, Wisdom Mutasa (Dalubuhle Dlodlo 42nd minute), John Chinyerere
— @ZililoR