The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
The Bulawayo Arts Festival (Baf) is a great opportunity for the city to showcase its cultural diversity and artistry, cementing the fact that it is Zimbabwe’s cultural capital. The arts extravaganza that kicked off yesterday will be held until Saturday with various performances across two platforms, online through shows and offline through acts at various venues. With the manner in which the programme is spelt out and the array of artistes that are performing, it informs the public that Bulawayo is a cosmopolitan city and province. There are artistes from as far as Harare, Mutare, Plumtree, Masvingo, Beitbridge and Gwanda who are performing at the Baf this year. The last show of the festival, for instance, will feature performances by Zhezhingtons from Gwanda, Travellers Band from Gweru, Madlela Skhobokhobo from Gwanda, Holy Ten from Harare, Victor Kunonga based in Harare but grew up in Bulawayo and Qeqeshiwe from Bulawayo. It will also be a mixture of youth and experience, contemporary and traditional with an array of genres from rhumba to Afro Jazz, house and hip hop music. This is a reflection of the way in which Bulawayo is in its heart and soul, diverse and accommodative with almost all of Zimbabwe’s cultures and art forms finding their space in the city. In 2019, President Mnangagwa was in the city as it hosted the historic interface between him and artistes for the launch of the National Arts, Culture and Heritage Policy. Part of the entourage were First Lady, Amai Auxillia Mnangagwa, Minister of Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services, Monica Mutsvangwa, Minister of Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation, Kirsty Coventry, Minister of Women Affairs, Community, Small and Medium Enterprises Sithembiso Nyoni, Finance and Economic Development Minister Mthuli Ncube. Today, President Mnangagwa will once again be in the city to lead another high-powered delegation as he officiates at the Baf Creative and Cultural Industries Conference and Urban Heritage Tour and Eco-Tourism Programme. His return to Bulawayo after the 2019 meeting with artistes shows that he and his Government are committed to working with the arts sector and want to finish off what they started. They recognise that the creative and cultural industries are at the centre of economic development and festivals like these are integral. His presence also shows Bulawayo’s dedication when it comes to developing the arts. Bulawayo holding the arts festival under Covid-19 also demonstrates that the city and its artistes are the frontrunners in coming up with innovative ideas to showcase their art. The city undisputedly leads and provides a foundation on how things should be done in the arts. For example, when the Bulawayo Arts Awards (BAA) were introduced in 2017, due to their outstanding organisation and execution, they changed how award ceremonies in the country were to be organised. The inaugural edition that was live-streamed, a first for such shows then, left many in awe as the awards trended on social media. It was an extravaganza where everyone went all out and was dressed to the nines. This provided a template on how to do things with the National Arts Merit Awards organising team led by Napoleon Nyanhi, coming down to Bulawayo to learn from the BAA team so as to adopt their model. The same applies with the Zimbabwe Music Awards (Zima) organisers who took some of the BAA organisers on board for the organisation of their event leading to a more improved event. Now in Covid-19 times, with many festivals failing to take off, perhaps the Baf will provide a bedrock on how the sector can work under the new normal, on how festivals can now be organised and how art shows should not be confined to one genre or art form. But in order to make the event a success, the main drivers — the artistes — need to deliver their best as a lot of people will be watching. This festival is meant to prove and remind people that Bulawayo is Zimbabwe’s cultural capital so artistes from the region need to go all out with their acts as a lot is at stake. Organisers too, need to bring their A-game as many organisers of similar events, or events in general are following Baf closely to see how they will execute it. Artistes nationwide who have been calling on Government to reopen the arts sector are also pinning their hopes on this event as it is one of the few that have been allowed to have physical audiences, although in limited numbers. Either way, all eyes are on the Baf with hope that the event that is in its second edition, will be a resounding success.