The Chronicle Midlands Bureau Chief
ZIMBABWE National Chamber of Commerce (ZNCC) president, Dr Tinashe Manzungu, has received a merit award in recognition of his work as a business leader and contribution to Zimbabwe’s investment agenda. Dr Manzungu, who is the founder and executive chairman of TM Group, which is into property development, health, insurance, finance and ICT, was given the certificate of honour during a recent annual business summit for international honours held in Dubai, United Arab Emirates. The summit brought together business executives from industry and commerce backgrounds to contribute towards cross-border trading, investments opportunities and business modelling. Deliberations were centred on challenges and solutions to cross border business, networking and business pitching opportunities under the theme: “business beyond borders — building a global network for strategic partnerships”. Dr Manzungu received the global excellence leadership certificate from the Governing Council of Leaders Without Borders Development Centre. In an interview, he said the summit was an eye opener for Zimbabwe in terms of activating systems to remove major barriers to foreign direct investment especially as it has to do with domestic stakeholders. “We attended the annual business summit/ international honours in Dubai recently where I received the global excellence leadership certificate from the Governing Council of Leaders Without Borders Development Centre,” he said. “This is a great honour as it recognises us as a country that we are well on course in promoting business.”
Dr Manzungu said there was a lot of interest and enquiry on business development in the country by investors attending the summit, adding that the country had potential in terms of cross-border investments. “While there is a need to protect the local stakeholders so that they benefit from FDI, there is a need for a competitive alternative for better quality and a more viable benefit,” he said. “The investors also looked at the role that the exchange rate plays in the success of the business especially of an investor from a weaker economy and how such challenges if any be resolved,” said Dr Manzungu.