The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
ZANU-PF Midlands provincial leadership has completed investigations into the violence that rocked Kwekwe Central primary poll leading to the indefinite suspension of the process in October last year. The election, pitting businessman Energy ‘‘Dhala’’ Ncube and clergyman-cum-businessman Archbishop Kandros Mugabe, were called off after angry youths disrupted the smooth flow of the proceedings accusing some party big wigs of meddling in the process. Rowdy youths thronged the party’s district headquarters demanding to be addressed on a plethora of issues chief among them the alleged doctored voters roll. Addressing a virtual Kwekwe Press Club recently, Zanu-PF provincial chairperson, Engineer Daniel Mackenzie-Ncube said the investigations into what transpired had been completed. Without revealing the findings, he said: “The investigations are complete, what is now required is to make a decision based on the recommendations of those investigations. I will check with Dr Obert Mpofu on the way forward and as soon as I get a response, I will update you on the way forward.” Eng Mackenzie-Ncube said the situation within the party was worrying and a decision had to be made fast before the situation got out of hand. The two rival camps are also accusing each other of having caused the chaos that rocked the election, a situation Eng Mackenzie Ncube said was worrying. “A decision has to be made and that has to be taken as fast as possible so that we do not deteriorate into a situation that we do not regret tomorrow,” he said. The election was meant to elect a candidate to stand for the party in Kwekwe Central Constituency in case of a by-election. The seat was left vacant following the death of Masango Blackman Matambanadzo. Several vehicles were damaged during the skirmishes that also left some polling agents and police details nursing injuries. Six party youths have since appeared in court over the skirmishes and are out on bail.