The Chronicle Michelle Nyanzira, Chronicle Reporter
ZANU-PF Women’s League is geared up for the Zimbabwe International Trade Fair (ZITF) to be held next month and yesterday showcased their hand-made products at the party’s Bulawayo provincial offices at Davies Hall. The projects that have been significant in helping women feed their families include the production of peanut butter, petroleum jelly, washing soap, detergents, traditional wear, perfumes and uniforms. In an interview, Senator Molly Mpofu said women should take the lead to develop the country. “These projects should uplift women and let them shine. “Women should learn to be dependent on themselves and learn to use their hands. If the mothers learn, they can then teach the younger generation to be self-reliant, learn their culture and respect. “The Women’s Bank is also now there to help them with capital for their projects. “We call upon the Ministry of Industry and Commerce to allocate a place or factory for women to do their developments,” said Senator Mpofu. She said the products will be showcased at ZITF. Zanu-PF Bulawayo Women’s League chairperson Cde Rebecca Manjere said: “Since we are hosting the Trade Fair, we wanted to see the works of our Bulawayo women. If they showcase their products, it will boost their business and improve their livelihoods.” One of the women, Cde Lindiwe Musasa said showcasing the products at the fair will help women to gain clientele. “With the Women’s Bank now opened for us we are pushing to make a difference in the country,” she said. Women’s League deputy secretary for production Cde Mollina Dube said the projects help women to cater for their families. “We benefitted from Intwasa/Pfumvudza and we hope these products will uplift us and make more income for ourselves,” she said. Women’s League deputy secretary for business and liaison Cde Josephine Danda encouraged other women to follow in their footsteps. “Women should join hands and fight poverty by being creative, making unique products and distributing them,” she said.
She said youths should also make a difference for a better future. — @michieroxya