The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
THERE is now hope for the revival of the arts sector after President Mnangagwa, on Thursday, gave artistes the go-ahead to hold live musical shows within the threshold of 50 people in attendance. While handing over musical equipment that was donated by Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation Deputy Minister Tinoda Machakaire to two musicians, Andy Muridzo and Chief Hwenje at State House in Harare, President Mnangagwa urged artistes to comply with the number of people prescribed by the law. He said this was consistent with Government’s desire to contain the Covid-19 pandemic that has claimed lives of people in the country and globally. For the past year, artistes have had to endure adapting to the new normal by turning to the virtual path as the arts sector was closed due to the ongoing pandemic. Although this kept them connected to their fans, it was not viable as most were not making money from virtual performances. But following the President’s announcement, that chapter has been closed partially as artistes can now rekindle past memories and make new ones with their fans. However, considering that artistes are used to staging mega concerts with the hope to cash in, how will it be possible for them to stage shows for such a small audience? Will there be a financial gain for them considering the amount they will have paid to secure venues and other logistics like equipment? Saturday Leisure caught up with artistes and promoters from the Matabeleland region who applauded the move by the President. Most were however quick to say there is need to consider increasing the number of attendees as 50 is too few. They also said limiting audiences is likely going to be very challenging. Below is what they had to say: Novuyo Seagirl (musician)
“We’re excited about the reopening of the arts sector. We’d missed that one on one with the audience. The presence of people gives you that drive and the response (number of patrons) you get from live shows, shows where you are going as an artiste,” she said. Madlela Skhobokhobo (musician) Madlela, although welcoming the development said controlling and limiting the crowds is going to be very challenging. “We welcome the development. It was long overdue and we hope with time, they will increase the number. Imagine going to a place like Filabusi where most of my fans are gold panners, they won’t really allow me to hold a show with such a number.” Sipho Mazibuko (modelling guru)
The veteran hailed the Government for this move saying this was going to be a great relief for artistes who were struggling to make ends meet due to lack of shows. “This is very good considering that artistes have not been working for a very long time. It’s a very huge relief. Artistes have been suffering without any income for their families. This is a very good development.” Prince Joel Nyoni (Ngoma Ingoma band member)
“We are happy. This is something that we’ve been waiting for, for a long time. However, it’s a challenge, the number is too small considering a seven-member band like Ngoma Ingoma where already as solo artistes, we have a huge following.” Master Zhoe (musician)
“We’d like to thank His Excellency, President ED Mnangagwa for giving us such a chance that we’ve been longing for, for the whole year. What we now wish for is that they increase the numbers.” Mzoe 7 (musician)
“This is a good start to open up the sector, monitor the situation, and hopefully, increase the number of attendees as we go forward. But I think for promoters, it’s still a blow because the expenses of hiring equipment and the artiste might still not meet the targets of them getting profits.” Drivo (theatre director)
“This is a very welcome move and we appreciate it. However, we’d have wished for a full opening without restrictions on numbers as we all know that our sector thrives through numbers. But, we’re glad we have somewhere to start. “The ball is now on venue and space owners’ courts as they must also prepare themselves and avail conducive atmospheres to host shows.” Jemima Mandemwa (model)
“The opening of the arts sector is exciting as it will allow us to expand our ideas and make use of our creativity. Also, it will allow for more opportunities for people to showcase their talents. Covid-19 crippled the arts sector and through the reopening of the sector, it will breathe life into an already struggling sector. This will alleviate the plight of artistes in terms of their economic position.” Mduduzi (3D Events music promoter)
“We are grateful to the President for allowing us to work. We’ve been waiting for this time to come and will probably start promoting local artistes first. As things open up more, we’ll start hosting foreign acts. We’ll also ensure that we adhere to the issue of numbers, that’s a promise.” – @mthabisi_mthire