The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Indodakazi/Mwanasikana, a Young Artists Development School (Yads) play that seeks to educate the masses about social issues revolving around communities was a hit at the just-ended Bulawayo Arts Festival (Baf) with its cast grateful for the opportunity. The play that was premiered in April has been showcased at various high-density suburbs in Bulawayo to aid communities to come up with their own solutions on how to eradicate, among other issues, early child marriages and sexual injustices in communities. In what was a first, Indodakazi/Mwanasikana featured on the second day of Baf at Bulawayo Theatre and it was an exciting experience for the cast and crew that is filled with zealous and talented young artists. Chronicle Showbiz caught up with those behind the production who expressed joy in being part of the arts festival. Yads founder and director of the production, Mzingaye Ngwabi said they were grateful for the opportunities presented to them by Baf. “It was an honour to showcase our play at the festival. Being part of the High Level conference was amazing as the President of Zimbabwe and his Cabinet took time to engage creatives. During the conference, I got to meet and connect with other arts companies and I’m confident this will open doors for Yads and its young people. “I’d like to thank the Baf organisers for reigniting a spark of passion and respect for the arts in Bulawayo,” said Ngwabi. Rejoice Zivengwa who plays the role of Sihle in Indodakazi/Mwanasikana said: “It was an honour performing at Baf. I never thought I’d one day, perform at one of the biggest festivals in Bulawayo. “It was amazing and an achievement for me. For that, I’d like to thank Yads and Baf.” Sidumisile Mthethwa who plays the role of Felistas said: “I’ve never been this excited. This was the greatest opportunity any actor can grab. I’ve always wanted to perform at a big festival and thank the Almighty that this was made possible through the Indodakazi/Mwanasikana play.” Kumbilani Ncube who plays the role of Josphat said: “Performing at Baf was a whole new experience for me and I was overwhelmed by the magnitude of the festival. “Our performance was one to remember because of the smiles on the faces of our audience.” – @mthabisi_mthire