The Chronicle Founding nationalist and late former Vice-President Joshua Mqabuko Nyongolo Nkomo will forever be one of the most respected figures in Zimbabwe’s history. Dr Nkomo was a selfless leader who dedicated his life to serving the nation. He fought for political independence and after the country returned to the hands of its rightful owners, the black majority, Dr Nkomo fought for economic independence. His magnanimous character made him a darling of all Zimbabweans across the tribal divide, earning him nicknames and titles such as Father Zimbabwe, Chibwe Chitedza, Mtekwa-tekwa, Shumba ye Zimbabwe. It is without a doubt that Father Zimbabwe deserves to be honoured even post his living years. Generations and generations to come will continue to be indebted to him for all his years of service. It is in the same spirit that yesterday we praised Government for replacing bollards surrounding the Dr Nkomo’s statue in Bulawayo that were knocked down by motorists. Critically, a permanent solution in controlling traffic around the statue is being sought. The statue was mounted in December 2013 at the intersection of 8th Avenue and Joshua Mqabuko Nkomo Street. Reckless motorists have over the years destroyed the bollards by crashing into them, however, as National Museum and Monuments of Zimbabwe director Dr Godfrey Mahachi said, the department is in discussion with other stakeholders in addressing the issue once and for all. Dr Nkomo’s statue is a hallmark of Bulawayo. It does not only add to the aesthetics but the rich history of the city. Dr Nkomo is not only a huge part of Bulawayo’s history or Zimbabwe’s history, but the liberation history of Africa as a whole. He is part and parcel of nationalism. This is why yesterday after touring the Joshua Mqabuko Nkomo Museum in Matsheumhlophe, as part of the launch of the Bulawayo Heritage Corridor, President Mnangagwa said Government was embarrassed that they had allowed the Nkomo family to take lead in preserving the legacy of Dr Nkomo through the establishment of the museum. As we report elsewhere in this edition, the President said going forward, Government will offer all the possible support to the Nkomo family to ensure that the museum gets the status it deserves. “My appreciation goes to the (Nkomo) family who have done this preservation of the history of Father Zimbabwe; this was a project initiated by the family. “We as Government feel embarrassed that we did not lead ourselves, but now that it is there, I have assured my younger sister (Mrs Thandiwe Nkomo-Ibrahim, daughter to the late Dr Nkomo) that she will receive support from Government to make sure that this place gets the status that it deserves,” said President Mnangagwa. We applaud the President and his Government for honouring the great Chibwe Chitedza — the slippery rock that was elusive to the racist Rhodesian regime. He was not elusive to his people. He was actually a man of the people who deserves much honour and praise. Dr Nkomo and many other liberation heroes must indeed be honoured and celebrated.