The Chronicle MOOVAH, Zimbabwe’s fastest-growing mobile phone-based insurance from Cassava Smartech Zimbabwe — with products covering vehicles, property, household goods, senior citizens and other assets — continues to offer significant value and convenience to its clients. The insurance unit, sitting under Cassava’s Insurtech division, has brought unprecedented ease and convenience for the public to get motor vehicle insurance at the click of a button. “As we enter the renewal season, our Moovah mobile application ensures motorists do not have to wait in long queues to get their vehicles covered. All they need to do is to download the App and get covered, wherever they may be — from the comfort of their homes or offices,” said Moovah’s Chief Insurance Officer, Dr Nathan Chikono. In Zimbabwe, all vehicles — cars, trucks and motorcycles — are required, under the Road Traffic Act (Chapter 13.11) to have at the very minimum Third Party insurance against physical damage and/or bodily injury resulting from traffic accidents. Dr Chikono said in addition to providing full Third-Party cover, Moovah also offers unique and comprehensive motor insurance, which provided full Third Party cover, Fire and Theft plus accidental damage insurance to an insured person’s vehicle, including medical expenses of up to ZW$20  000, plus towing charges. The insured vehicle is covered up to the insured value or market value, while cars damaged by hail storms, falling trees or other acts of nature are also underwritten on the policy. “Insurance protects you from a possible unforeseen circumstance and is an asset, not a liability. Whether it’s man-made damage, such as an accident, or natural calamities, such as floods, having car insurance protects you against both, and much more,” Dr Chikono said. Moovah is also offering Crop and Livestock insurance, which covers animal husbandry and farmers against loss resulting from unfortunate occurrences, such as fire, theft, disease and accidental death. It covers domestic animal deaths emanating from diseases, including epidemics, difficulty in delivery, snake bites, impact by vehicles, theft and transit risks. The policy allows farmers to enjoy discounted rates on other Moovah farm asset insurance products, such as for tractors, buildings and milking parlours. Moovah Crop Insurance also covers agricultural producers against unforeseen losses arising from natural and unnatural disasters. Disasters covered include crop destruction by wind storms, uncontrollable pests, stray animals, fire and frosts. Dr Chikono said it was critical for Zimbabweans to get insurance cover as it offers financial security and peace of mind. “No matter how much you earn, or how much you have saved, your financial position can be seriously dented by an unexpected event, in a moment. So, the best way to become financially secure is to cover yourself, your family and your assets with insurance,” he said. Under its Home Insurance, Moovah covers buildings, fixtures and fittings against damage caused by theft, fire, lightning and explosion. As value-added benefits, a customer will get a “No Claims Bonus” of up to 10 percent annually, with a maximum of up to 50 percent. They will also have access to MARS Emergency Ambulance and a ZW$5 000 Burial Assistance for a maximum of four individuals per household. The public can register for home and buildings insurance cover by dialling *901# and Select Non-Motor, Select Home Comprehensive Cover, Select Buildings / Home Cover and then Select Currency and follow the registration instructions. “We also have Moovah House Contents policy, which covers household goods or the contents within the house against theft, fire, lightning and explosion, while the Personal Effects policy covers portable personal belonging, such as jewellery, cameras and mobile devices,” Dr Chikono said. Moovah insurance products include Senior Citizens Cover, which is tailor-made for seniors aged 55 years and above, covering motor vehicle, personal effects, home and household contents for 30 percent less.