The Chronicle A three-part special of Babes Wodumo and Mampintsha’s colourful traditional ceremony that took place in April is set to air on Showmax at the end of the month, showcasing the couple’s controversial love affair that has been marred by gender-based violence (GBV). A trailer for the show, Uthando Lodumo, premiered this week and teased the couple going through premarital counselling, their pregnancy news and dramatic lobola negotiations that saw the Simelane family demanding 11 cows — this after they rejected Mampintsha’s first lobola letter. “I’m tired of being a girlfriend . . . I want you to upgrade me to a higher level where all the ‘side-chicks’ know who I am,” Babes Wodumo (real name Bongekile Simelane) can be heard saying in the clip. “We made headlines, trended on social media . . . I’ve come to apologise for everything that has happened,” Mampintsha (real name Mandla Maphumulo) says as he apologises in front of the Simelane family. In 2019, an assault charge opened by Babes Wodumo against Mampintsha was withdrawn after both parties adhered to a Family and Marriage Society of SA mediation process. Further addressing the backlash from GBV movements, Nomsa Philiso, MultiChoice channel director for local entertainment, said: “I think what will surprise South Africans is their love and commitment to each other in spite of the challenges they may have had. They acknowledge that it hasn’t always been a bed of roses, which makes them authentic and true to themselves and their journey. “The show focuses on how they have overcome their challenges, working through them with their families. We do not condone any form of abuse or gender-based violence, but we believe that South Africans need to start talking honestly about these issues and confronting them.”
GBV controversy has not been the only challenge the show has faced. Adjusted level 3 national lockdown regulations in December/January forced the couple to postpone their wedding. The show, produced by Thomas Gumede and Lungile Radu, had to push back the original February air date. “It was definitely a real challenge working towards a goal that was constantly changing due to unforeseen variables,” Radu told Sowetan on Wednesday. “Planning a wedding without knowing when things will change is not for the faint-hearted. The entire team and talent worked well together to adapt to whatever challenges arose and we managed to pull it off. “The biggest highlight was going on this journey with them and watching how they have grown as individuals and as a couple. We obviously had a good old time at the wedding, so that was definitely a highlight.” —Sowetan.