The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
GOVERNMENT has employed a new business manager at Agricultural and Rural Development Authority (Arda)-run Bubi-Lupane Irrigation Scheme in Lupane, Matabeleland North to replace the one who was fired three months ago for alleged incompetence. The 180-hectare Bubi-Lupane Irrigation Scheme is a community project, which Government, through Arda, is reviving. Minister of Lands, Agriculture, Fisheries, Water and Rural Resettlement, Dr Anxious Masuka recently fired the scheme manager on the spot after he was riled by the fact that Government has had to write off a sorghum crop at the scheme leading to a wastage of resources. The Minister was not impressed with the sorghum crop after noting that there would be no meaningful yield and subsequently instructed that it be removed during his tour of the Bubi-Lupane Irrigation in March. The crop was not properly planted leaving a lot of gaps, leading the minister to conclude that poor agronomic work was on display. The Minister said a lackadaisical approach to work had no place in the Second Republic that was anchored on maximisation of resources and betterment of citizens’ lives through production. In an interview, Dr Masuka said following the appointment of a new manager there has been tremendous improvement at the Bubi-Lupane Irrigation Scheme. “My visit to Bubi-Lupane Irrigation scheme was to assess how well farmers have done under the winter wheat programme being the first one in this scheme. “We also have employed a new scheme business manager and evidently there is change on the ground,” he said. “Farmers have planted on all the three centre pivots 180 hectares and this has germinated and we now look forward to ensuring that they put the right fertilisers and I am confident that they will be able to get a good crop.” Dr Masuka said Government has set minimum requirements for managing Arda irrigation sites. He said going forward, Government wants Arda managers to be stationed on-site as opposed to visiting the farms. The Bubi-Lupane Irrigation Project, which is being revived by Government, has since been identified as a pilot project for an integrated business model to be replicated by 450 irrigation schemes across the country. The model is part of the Second Republic’s efforts to accelerate rural development and industrialisation in line with Vision 2030. Dr Masuka said operations under his ministry should be in sync with the Second Republic’s thrust of transforming the country’s economy through agriculture. He said the country is on the verge of its largest harvest in 37 years with farmers expecting to reap between 2,5 and 2,8 million tonnes of maize and above 360 000 tonnes of traditional small grains following above normal rains that fell countrywide this year. Dr Masuka said parastatals under his ministry must wake up to the realities of the Second Republic and the President’s thrust of using agriculture as a vehicle for the attainment of vision 2030. Arda chief executive officer Mr Tinotenda Mhiko said the deployment of the new scheme development manager to Bubi-Lupane Irrigation Scheme will ensure that the scheme is run viably and sustainably.-@ mashnets