The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Chronicle Reporter
GWANDA residents have welcomed the move by Government to set up a complaints commission saying there was a need for the commission to set up offices in various districts to protect citizens from possible abuse by security services. Government is consulting members of the public in crafting of the Zimbabwe Independent Complaints Commission Bill which, if approved, will enable complaints from citizens against members of the security services to be investigated in line with constitutional requirements. The joint Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Justice, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and Defence and Home Affairs is holding public hearings across the country to solicit for citizens views on the Bill. Speaking during a consultative meeting in Gwanda yesterday, a resident, Mr Ndaniso Mpande said the commission had to be accessible even to people in the remote parts of the country. He thanked Government for introducing the Bill saying that was a realisation by the Government that there could be cases of some members of the security sector violating the rights of citizens. “Our appeal is that the commission that will be set up under this Bill decentralises its operations as soon as possible. “The commission must have offices in all districts so that it’s accessible to most people. If they are centralised in Harare then that defeats the whole process of setting up the commission in the first place,” he said. Ms Siduduzile Masilela said the commission should be given the powers to arrest and prosecute. She said once a member of the security services was found to have committed an offence they should be fired from work. Ms Masilela said cases had to be prosecuted as a matter of urgency. She said the commission was supposed to allocate a lengthy time towards investigating cases instead of the recommended three years. “There are some cases such as rape which take long and for the Bill to state that the commission allocates a maximum of three years towards investigating a case is unfair. In fact, a case doesn’t have an expiry date so can this period be extended so that victims get justice,” she said. The residents also said the commission should create a safe environment where women and children who were the main victims of sexual abuse could freely report cases. They further said there was a need for the Bill to clearly state how witnesses and victims will be protected. Ms Nomsa Vele said the commission had to put in place stern measures to monitor daily activities of security services as some were abusing citizens on a daily basis, especially at roadblocks. She said victims had to be spared from too much paper work as it will discourage many from making reports. Mr Jastone Mazhale said measures had to be put in place to safeguard the independence of the commission so that it could be effective. Residents also said members of the security forces had to be sued in their individual capacities and not under the capacity of an institution. They also said the Bill must clearly state how investigations will be conducted. The residents said the composition of the commission should also incorporate youths while the commission should also deal with minor matters. Cabinet approved the Bill last November. The objective of the Bill is to provide for the establishment of an independent complaints mechanism for members of the public against members of the security services pursuant to Section 210 of the Constitution. The Bill is an attempt to reform the security sector in Zimbabwe so that its members are held accountable for any human rights violations through the independent commission. Chair of the Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Defence, Home Affairs and Security Services Retired Brigadier General Levi Mayihlome who is also Umzingwane Member of Parliament said a report containing the views of the public will be presented in Parliament, once the public hearings are completed countrywide. — @DubeMatutu