The Chronicle Boitumelo Makhurane, Chronicle Reporter
THE Zimbabwe National Water Authority (ZINWA) Zinwa has said national dams have sufficient water to support the 85 000-hectare winter cropping target. The country recorded the second highest inflows in dams in 50 years following incessant rains in the last cropping season. The water authority urged farmers engaged in winter cropping to get water abstraction agreements. Zinwa corporate communications and marketing officer Mr Tsungirirai Shoriwa said national dam level stands at 90.4 percent. “All those farmers engaged in the winter cropping season are advised to ensure that their water use is in terms of water abstraction agreements as required by the Water Act. “Any water use for purposes other than primary purposes, without a water abstraction agreement constitutes an offence and offenders are liable to prosecution. As of Wednesday, last week, the national dam level average stood at 90.4 percent,” he said. Water users are urged to continue using the available water quite sparingly and efficiently. According to Zinwa, as of Monday the Bulawayo water supply dam levels were as follows; Insiza 82.5 percent, Mtshabezi 71.4 percent, Upper Ncema 50.7 percent, Lower Ncema 78.9 percent and Mzingwane 28.8 percent. Mr Shoriwa urged farmers to regularly monitor moisture level around crop fields as well as temperatures in poultry farms and hatcheries and adjust accordingly. Zinwa director for water supply operation Engineer Admire Mare said inflows into the dams boosted the potential for irrigation. “Water availability for different winter wheat clusters points to the adequacy of water to embark on a successful winter cropping and next summer cropping. “Major dams can support a potential hectarage of 184,582 hectares. Other small dams and private water sources can support 46,356ha giving a total of 230,938 ha, he said. At least 85 000 hectares of land will be put under winter wheat this year up from over 42 000 hectares achieved last year, as the country seeks to boost output and meet local industry requirements. Annual wheat consumption for Zimbabwe is estimated at above 400 000 tonnes and wheat imports of around 80 percent are made each year.-@Boity104