The Chronicle Business Reporter
CASSAVA Smartech’s subsidiary, VAYA Mobility and the Zimbabwe United Passenger Company (Zupco) have unveiled “Vaya neZupco”, a partnership that will give the travelling public the convenience to book seats on long-distance buses ahead of travel and get travel insurance cover. The strategic partnership was announced yesterday during a launch event in Harare, which was attended by senior executives from Zupco, the Ministry of Local Government and Public Works, VAYA Technologies and Cassava Smartech, among other stakeholders. Coming at a time when innovative mobility services are offering more choices and greater travel options to millions of travellers around the world, the partnership is set to transform the country’s public transport sector and bring convenience to thousands of travellers. Guest of honour, Dr Eng Talon Garikai, who is Pro-Vice Chancellor of Harare Institute of Technology (HIT), said building confidence in public transportation was critical in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic. “It is through the introduction of such life-changing innovations as the online booking system we are launching today, which is designed to bring convenience and order to the sector, that we can modernise our public transport system,” he said. Eng Garikai said the launch of the “VAYA ne Zupco” partnership and online booking platform was aligned to global trends of public and private sector partnerships that transform people’s lives. “I hope that this innovation and partnership, which will initially support passengers travelling between Harare and Bulawayo, will quickly be rolled out throughout other cities and across the country, so that our people can benefit from this smart partnership,” he added. Mr Givemore Jojo, the chief executive officer of VAYA Technologies, which manages the platform-based Vaya Mobility business, said the Covid-19 pandemic had underlined the importance of bringing convenience and improved safety to the public transport industry. The sector plays a crucial role in connecting people in business and commerce, and in transporting goods and services and driving sustainable development. “In this partnership, our customers and the public can now undertake long-distance travel by simply booking a ride in a Zupco bus from their mobile phone, using the VAYA App, and they get to pay the fare via EcoCash,” he said in a post launch statement. “This will save money and time, and protect our travellers from rowdy touts at the point of boarding. It also eliminates the risk of contracting Covid-19 and the risks associated with travel using unregistered private and public vehicles.” Mrs Dorothy Zimuto, a senior executive at VAYA Mobility Zimbabwe, said passenger convenience and safety was a priority hence the partnership with Zupco makes sense. “The safety and convenience of the travelling public is something we value. That is why we were only too happy to partner with Zupco and bring our technology to serve the public,” she said. Mrs Zimuto said the fintech group was using various digital platforms and synergies among its business units to help the public enjoy a safe, affordable and convenient passenger transportation service. VAYA has also partnered EcoSure to offer passenger insurance amounting up to ZW$50 000 in the event of an accident on the road resulting in hospitalisation, disability or death. This insurance is for every passenger that books and pays for their intercity travel ticket via the “Vaya neZupco” App or the Web portal. VAYA Technologies is a part of Cassava Smartech, the fintech corporate group listed on the Zimbabwe Stock Exchange.