The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau TOPPICK Investments, a wholly-owned indigenous company, has channeled US$5,5 into irrigation development infrastructure at the highly-integrated Zhovhe Farm, some 83km west of Beitbridge town. The company’s managing director, Mrs Saliwe Marema, told stakeholders during a recent tour of the farm by the Minister of State in the Office of the President and Cabinet, Davis Marapira, that so far, a 7km pipeline has been constructed to boost the new citrus farming project. Part of the money had been used to import 68 000 orange trees, which are being planted with the number set to be increased in phases up to 277 000 trees. “We are planting 68 000 trees and have so far constructed a 7km water pipeline from Zhovhe Dam to the farm. This will feed our orange orchard and the irrigation pivots on the winter, maize, soya beans sections,” she said. “In addition to the pipeline we have since 2015 acquired 17 irrigation pivots, which have come in handy during our last wheat and maize crops that were planted under the command agriculture model.” Mrs Marema said the company has made investments into fish farming and animal husbandry covering goats, sheep, poultry, cattle, and plant processing. The company expects to derive higher dividend from citrus production in the next five years. In the long term, Mrs Marema said they were also considering diversifying to production of dairy cattle and related products. “The market for citrus is big in the country and our aim is to produce for the local and export market,” she said. Since the beginning of operations around 2014, the organization has invested US$15 million in various businesses across the country. These, said Mrs Marema,  include the integrated farm, two lodges, three service stations, two funeral parlours  and various corporate social responsibility activities, including the construction of proposed clinic in the Whunga area. Speaking during the same event, the organization’s chief operations officer, Mr John Mudau, said they have employed more than 200 people from Beitbridge District alone. The citrus plantation is set to employ more. “We are running an integrated farm with over 1 000 cattle, 400 goats (boer and matabele breeds), 500 sheep, 24 floating cages with the capacity to carry 2,4 million fingerlings, and 1 500 Sasso chicken,” said Mr Mudau. “In the last two farming seasons, we managed to deliver 1 200 tonnes of wheat and 800 tonnes of maize to the Grain Marketing Board. “We are hoping that with the aid of the new irrigation infrastructure, in the next farming season we will have even bigger yields.”- @tupeyo 