The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
THE Law Society of Zimbabwe (LSZ) has warned members of the public against engaging 23 listed lawyers who have no practicing certificates for various reasons. The lawyers, LSZ, said are not allowed to appear before any court, prison, police station, or lodge any documents before the Deeds Registry or carry out any legal work without prior written confirmation from the society. A total of 16 lawyers making the list are from Harare. In an interview recently, LSZ secretary Mr Edward Mapara urged members of the public to be wary of lawyers who don’t have practicing certificates. “For a lawyer to practice each year, he or she must carry a practicing certificate (PC). So, if one doesn’t renew, they will not have a PC and we then inform members of the public so that they are aware of who to or not to engage. Reasons for someone not to possess a PC include taking a sabbatical, facing disciplinary action issues or might be de-registered and therefore the need for the members of the public to know them so that they don’t engage them since they are not eligible to engage in any legal work,” he said. Mr Mapara said registration to get a PC is $21 000 for 12 months. “The Law Society of Zimbabwe (LSZ) wishes to advise that the following members did not hold practicing certificates as at 14 June 2021. They therefore have no right of audience before the court, police station or prison until a time when they have regularised their licensing status. In the event that they regularise, we still encourage the members of the public to first confirm with the LSZ before engaging them,” he said. The names of the lawyers who don’t have the PC — he said — have also been sent to the Judicial Service Commission (JSC). “Bekithemba Mlauzi, (no pc unattached), Harare, Bothwell Ndhlovu (no pc) Bothwell Ndhlovu Attorneys (under curatorship) Harare, Elinah Gandzi (no pc resigned) Mutare, Felicity Cleopatra Sibanda (no pc resigned) Bulawayo, Fortunate Daniel Molokela Tsiye (no pc unattached) Harare, Goodwill Chikukutu, (no pc firm under curatorship) Harare, Guni Guni (no pc) Guni and Guni legal practitioners) Harare, Liberty Mandiveyi (no pc unattached) Harare, Lovemore Mungeni (no pc Mungeni and Muzvondiwa legal practitioners) Harare, Martin Chasakara, (no pc), M Chasakara law firm, under curatorship), Harare, Muyengwa E Motsi (no pc M E Motsi and Associates) Harare, Nobert Muhlolo (no pc Muhlolo legal practice), Harare, Reason Mutimba (no pc) Nyikadzino, Simango and Associates) Beitbridge, Sibusisiwe Sithole (no pc unattached) Chegutu, Tendai J Mupangwa (no pc unattached) Harare, Thabiso P Munyanyi (no pc T Munyanyi and Associates) Masvingo, Tinashe Thomas (no pc unattached) Harare, Tinei Oncemore Dodo (no pc Dodo and Partners) Harare, Trust Machaya (no pc unattached) Harare, Victuals Mapepa (unattached Mapepa and Associates legal practice), Harare, Clemence Matimba (no pc unattached) Bindura, Mlweliwenkululeko Ncube (no pc unattached) Bulawayo, Governor Pendei (unattached) Harare,” said Mr Mapara.