The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
THE Basketball Union of Zimbabwe held an induction workshop for the Sinda Mono-led Bulawayo Basketball Association executive committee on Sunday. The workshop was facilitated by Buz president Joe Mujuru and focused on issues such as governance, strategic planning and grassroots development. Members of the BBA executive that attended the workshop include Mono, his secretary-general Francis Dube, Athletes’ Commission president Langa Ndlovu, 3 x 3 president Tracy Phiri, Women and Youth Commission president Zanele Nzima, Competitions president Geraldine Chibonda and treasurer-general Reuben Mumbire. Also in attendance were Referees Commissioner Stanlake Gumbo and head of the Medical Commission Tadiwa Mangoma and a representative from the Media Commission. During his presentation, Mujuru challenged the new executive committee to ensure that its focus is on setting achievable goals and not just target the successful running of the league. He said emphasis must also be placed on the growth and development of the game in the province and asked the new committee to develop strategic plans for the various commissions. “Now that you have been elected, the real work begins and the work is not just ensuring your league is well run. You also need to understand that in addition to the league, your responsibility is also the growth and development of the game and building of new courts around the province so that you take the game to the people,” Mujuru said. He said the committee should set goals for both the short term and the long term. “Once you have your goals in place, it is imperative that each commission develops a strategy which will enable you as a collective to achieve these goals,” he said.
Mujuru also warned the committee against developing dictatorial tendencies that alienate them from their constituencies, which are the clubs.
“You must remember that you are there to serve the clubs. You need to develop strong communication links with them and try and make sure that they are always in the know of what you are doing. “If you fail in this regard, administering basketball will become very difficult for you. You are in this executive because the clubs gave you this mandate and you must always be cognisant of this fact,” Mujuru warned. He also stressed the need for the executive to ensure that all clubs have proper administrative structures in line with their own to enable effective communication between the BBA and clubs. Mono called for unity of purpose among his executive committee members to enable them to successfully run basketball in Bulawayo. “We have been mandated by our clubs to run the game in the province for the next four years. If we want to do this successfully, we have to be united and strive to have a shared vision. We must make sure we adhere to whatever policy strategies have been agreed on by this executive,” Mono said. “As you all know, basketball itself in the province does not own a single court and addressing this anomaly should be high on our priority list. It must be one of the key short to medium term goals of this executive.” The BBA will soon embark on a programme to increase participation of primary and secondary school pupils. The association will also work on a programme to increase the number of qualified coaches and match officials at primary, secondary and tertiary institutions.