The Chronicle June 30 will be the last day as a Barcelona player in the life of Lionel Messi. With an extension agreement still not in place, Messi would be a free agent from July 01. As heartbreaking as it may sound, Lionel Messi will no longer be a Barcelona player tomorrow, with the Argentine forward’s current contract set to expire today. Having publicly expressed desire to leave Barcelona last summer, Messi hasn’t yet signed a deal with the Spanish giants. Messi had listed a number of reasons behind his willingness to move on from Barcelona last summer. From a fallout with the board members to the team’s inability to challenge for top honours, Messi had said that he wants a change of clubs to challenge for the biggest titles once again. Since the day Messi expressed his desire to take up another challenge, the likes of Manchester City and Paris Saint-Germain are among the top clubs to have shown interest in the 34-year-old. Though rumours have been afloat for a while but Messi isn’t believed to have held talks with any club in an official capacity. The equation over the last 6 months between Messi and Barca is said to have improved, with the player now reportedly willing to tie himself to a new 2-year-old. Though the majority of the contract has been agreed upon, a few minor details of the contract, however, are set to be agreed upon between the two parties. As per a report in Sportsmail, Barcelona are eager to get Messi’s signature on a new contract but the negotiations are likely to take longer than expected, especially considering Messi’s participation in the Copa America with Argentina. Contract negotiations still ongoing. Messi’s hefty contract of £500,000 per week has also been an issue for Barcelona, especially since the Blaugrana club is supposed to lose £172m from its overall wage bill. With the Covid-19 pandemic reducing the club’s revenues, it was also reported that the board members had told Messi that they won’t be able to afford a similar salary anymore. – Times Now News