The Chronicle Yvonne Ncube, Chronicle Reporter
THE Government is moving to amend the Copper Control Act to stiffen penalties for illegal possession of copper cables without a valid licence. Those who will be found in possession of copper cables without a certificate of origin will face a mandatory 10-year prison sentence without the option of a fine, in a move meant to prevent vandalism of utilities. The country has of late been hit by a series of power outages mostly due to copper cables theft, a menace which forced the Zimbabwe Electricity Transmission and Distribution Company (ZETDC) to consider replacing copper cables with aluminium ones. “The purpose of this Bill is to amend the Copper Control Act [Chapter 14:06]. The vandalism of utilities through theft of copper cables has been exacerbated by the non-provision of specific offences in relation to these acts and non-deterrent penalties in the Copper Control Act.” “In order to address the foregoing, the Copper Control Act, should be amended to make it mandatory for all copper dealers to have certificates of origins for all the copper in their possession and impose minimum mandatory penalties for offenders,” states the Copper Control Amendment Bill, which was gazetted on Friday. The proposed amendments also provide for the forfeiture to the State of any vehicle or devices used to transport illegal copper upon conviction. “Clause 4 inserts a new section that makes it mandatory for all copper dealers to have a certificate of origin for all copper in their possession. This certificate of origin will include the names and addresses of both the seller and the purchaser, the description of copper, quantity, reasons for disposal. This section will further set a minimum mandatory sentence of ten (10) years without the option of a fine for failure to produce a certificate of origin. For security reasons the certificate must be endorsed by the police in the prescribed form and manner to be provided by the police,” reads the Bill in part. The Bill also awards administrative powers of setting licence fees to the Minister in consultation with technical expertise in his Ministry.-@SeehYvonne