The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE heartbreak Bulawayo Chiefs caused in the final stages of the 2019 Castle Lager Premier Soccer League race resulting in Chicken Inn losing the championship to FC Platinum is still fresh in the Gamecocks’ camp, which will be out for revenge when they face off at Barbourfields Stadium tomorrow. The two sides clash in a Chibuku Super Cup Group B match hard-pressed for maximum points to enhance their chances of progressing to the next stage of the tournament. Chiefs spoiled the Gamecocks’ championship hopes on Week 32 of the 2019 season by thrashing them 3-1, resulting in FC Platinum opening a three-point gap at the top of the league after many weeks tied at the top with just two games remaining in the season. The platinum miners maintained that gap and went on to win the league championship. Chicken Inn are currently tied on four points with Highlanders, but lead the log standings through a superior goal difference, with Chiefs and City in third and fourth, tied on one point. All four teams drew last weekend’s games, with City and Chiefs playing to a 2-2 draw, while Chicken Inn and Bosso settled for a goalless draw. Chicken Inn beat City 2-0 on the first day of the competition, while Chiefs lost 0-1 to Bosso. Epic clashes are expected this weekend, as teams are expected to have shaken off rust from the long layoff and players are beginning to gel. Chicken Inn coach Joey Antipas welcomes back the trio of defender Ian Nekati, midfielder Marlvin Gaki and striker Obriel Chirinda who missed the draw against Highlanders through injury and bereavement. Gaki and Chirinda were sidelined by injury, while Nekati was attending a family bereavement out of Bulawayo. Attacking midfielder Michael Charamba, who picked up a sheen injury, has been ruled out from the Chiefs’ encounter. Antipas is wary of Chiefs, aware of the danger that Chiefs pose. “Chiefs are a tricky opposition. They’ve got a good side and on a day that they’re on fire, they can shock anyone. What we simply have to do is go there with a positive mind and hopefully come up with three points. We know that they’re also gunning for three points, so they’ll come hard on us. “The last time we met Chiefs, they were like a possessed side and put us under lots of pressure. At times we panicked, didn’t handle the situation good and lost the championship. Now we’re ready for them,” said Antipas. Chicken Inn and Chiefs have met four times in the Premier Soccer League, with each side winning twice. Chiefs coach Thulani Sibanda predicts a tough encounter. “They can afford a draw, but for us, that is not enough because games are coming thick and fast. To remain in contention to progress to the next stage, we need maximum points. It won’t be easy, but we will fight,” said Sibanda. Chiefs will be without midfielders Panashe Shoko through injury and Joe Nyabinde, who was red-carded against City. Midfielder Hughe Chikosa has to pass a late fitness test. Striker Kundishora Chakanyuka, who hit a brace the last time Chiefs beat Chicken Inn, is out with a knee injury. Chibuku Super Cup fixtures
Today
Harare City vs Herentals (National Sports Stadium, 11am), Manica Diamonds vs Black Rhinos (Sakubva, 1pm), Bulawayo Chiefs vs Chicken Inn (Barbourfields Stadium, 3pm)
Tomorrow
Yadah vs ZPC Kariba (National Sports Stadium, 11am), Cranborne Bullets vs Tenax (Sakubva, 1pm), Highlanders vs Bulawayo City (1pm), Caps United vs Dynamos (National Sports Stadium, 3pm)