The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
GOVERNMENT has set July 14 as the deadline for the vaccination of frontline workers with those who would have shunned the exercise losing out on Covid-19 insurance payouts. Vaccinated frontline workers who test positive will, however, still be eligible for the Covid-19 insurance pay out. Cabinet also noted with concern that the surge of Covid-19 reported the previous week persisted with 3 882 cases recorded during the period under review, compared to 1 239 reported the previous week. The majority of cases were recorded in Mashonaland West (1 798), Mashonaland Central (1 375) and Midlands (493). The public is also discouraged from visiting or transiting through hotspots which are: Kariba, Karoi, Makonde, Chinhoyi, Mhangura, Chidamwoyo, Magunje, Chirundu and suburbs in Bulawayo which Nkulumane, Emakhandeni and northern suburbs. Mount Darwin, Chiredzi and Kwekwe were also identified as hotspots. In her post-Cabinet briefing yesterday, Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa said despite having been given an opportunity to vaccinate ahead of others, 20 percent of frontline workers did not heed to the call. “Noting that the frontline staff were given the opportunity to vaccinate ahead of others, the nation is advised that a considerable number of frontline workers (20 percent) have still not presented themselves for vaccination. Given the risk this poses not only to other workers but also to patients, Cabinet has set 14 July 2021 as the deadline for the vaccination of the frontline workers,” she said. “After this date, those who would not have been vaccinated will not receive Covid-19 insurance payouts. For the avoidance of doubt, those vaccinated staff members who test positive will, however, still be eligible for the Covid-19 insurance pay out.” Minister Mutsvangwa said Under Case Management Infection, Prevention and Control, hospital admissions due to Covid-19 have increased. “As of 27 June 2021, there were 353 hospitalised Covid-19 positive cases, of which 40 were new admissions, 97 were asymptomatic, 209 were mild to moderate 44 severe and three were in the intensive care unit,” she said. Minister Mutsvangwa said as the number of Covid-19 cases and hotspots continue to increase, law enforcement agencies have widened their scope of operations to help the Ministry of Health and Child Care contain the spread of the virus. She said security forces have intensified patrols along the country’s borders. The minister said since agriculture is an essential service, Cabinet resolved that Grain Marketing Board (GMB) Cottco and Tobacco Industry and Marketing Board (TIMB) will continue operating under normal business hours across the country. In announcing the new level four lockdown measures to curb the spread of the virus, President Mnangagwa yesterday reviewed the business hours from 8am-6PMm to 8AM-3.30PM. “Cabinet advises that Government continues to review the situation. His Excellency, the President has already issued further directives in this regard,” said Minister Mutsvangwa. She said Government has been put measures in place to increase the procurement of Covid-19 vaccines.
Two million doses of Sinovac Vaccine expected by end of this week while another 1,5 million doses are expected mid-July, 2021. “We are also expecting 1,5 million doses by August 2021 and another 1 500 000 doses by September 2021,” said Minister Mutsvangwa.
As of Sunday, a total of 764 248 people had received their first dose of Covid-19 vaccine and 534 906 their second dose across the country. Minister Mutsvangwa said measures are in place to safeguard health. “In addition, the nation is advised that travellers coming from countries with high risk of the Alpha and Delta Covid-19 variants of concern shall be quarantined in a designated hotel at their own expense and have PCR tests conducted at their own expense on arrival, on day three, day five and on day 10,” she said. — @mashnets