The Chronicle Tributes are flowing in for televangelist Temitope Balogun “TB” Joshua of the Synagogue Church of All Nations who died in Nigeria aged 57. Details surrounding his death were still not available as of yesterday afternoon but it is understood Joshua died on Saturday night in Lagos, shortly after hosting a meeting with partners of his TV channel, Emmanuel TV. TB Joshua was known as a fiery preacher and had followers worldwide. He used his TV channel to attract a large number of Christians from across the world. The TV channel, which is run by Joshua’s church, is one of the largest Christian broadcast stations available on DStv channel 390 and digitally on social networks. Joshua was one of Nigeria’s most influential and wealthiest pastors whose followers included prominent politicians and business leaders from across Africa and around the world. Founder of Spirit Embassy, evangelical preacher, Eubert Angel who interacted closely with the famous Nigerian prophet said he was pained by Joshua’s sudden death. “Last night, I received the rude and shocking news of the home-going of someone deeply dear to me and my family. The home going of Senior Prophet TB Joshua is most painful because if there truly were good men, he was certainly one. “However, we are so sure of where he is and know he ran an amazing race, amassed incomparable proofs with Christ and made a mark on this earth that can never be ignored or erased!” He said he was thankful for the exemplary life and impactful work of the late. “To the man I have known since my tender years in ministry, TB Joshua, your sudden passage is hard to understand for many. “We remain thankful for the decades of impactful work along with the exemplary life you lived while you were with us. “You are a General who set many things in place that generations will continue to copy. As a dear senior prophet, friend, Christian brother, father to many, prophetic example to me – though senior in every way to me, everytime we spoke you would be so humble and regarded not your seniority over me, but allowed me time to hear your mind and your humble spirit. “The thought that I will not see or hear from you again on this side of the divide, but only on videos, is unbelievable but as the Bible says ‘we should mourn not as though we are without knowledge’.” Commenting on Angel’s post, one fan, Dinesh Branson commented: “He leaves us with great memories and has also built into us, lessons and examples that we will carry with us.” On social media, TB Joshua’s followers are in mourning. Shared @DrOlufunmilayo on Twitter: “TB Joshua was someone who actually touched the lives of many poor people. Unlike many others, he was one pastor who actually reached out to poor people and always tried to help them.” On Facebook, Ross Adel said: “Daddy left us in this cold world alone I can’t think straight.” SimNom Barry said: “Daddy, may your soul rest in peace with the Lord.” @Irunnia tweeted, “This man fed widows and orphans, trained people he never met in schools and gave people jobs. He was hardly involved in politics like most other pastors and prophets.” Locally, comedian Mai Titi posted: “Thank you for all the extraordinary works you did on earth. A true man of God. “I believe it was time for you to rest and be with your Creator. “Although it’s painful to us, I know for sure you’re shining with the angels. Rest in the most peaceful peace Major Prophet. The most humble Man of God I knew.” In September 2014, Joshua’s church became a horror scene when the church’s six-storey building collapsed, killing 116 people, of whom 87 were South Africans. In July 2015, a coroner’s inquest found the collapse was as a result of negligence and said the church should be held criminally liable for the deaths. Joshua denied allegations of negligence and the case is still before the courtsd. -TimesLive/Showbiz Reporter