The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
THE Judicial Service Commission (JSC) has started the process of modifying the country’s courtrooms, fitting them with Covid-19-proofed booths to enhance safety in the process of accessing justice. Besides rolling out the integrated electronic case management system (IECMS), construction of wheelchair access ramps at 32 courts, repairing elevators at three courts, producing Braille and sign language as well as sensitising the population about disability issues as a way of ensuring accessibility especially for people with disabilities, JSC has also been working hard to make courts safe from the spread of coronavirus. Three courts namely Harare Magistrates’ Courts, Gweru Magistrates’ Courts and Hwange Magistrates’ Courts have been fitted with booths meant to protect all stakeholders who enter the courtroom for court proceedings, from Covid-19. A news crew noticed that Court B which is usually used as a regional court at the Hwange Magistrates’ Courts has been modified and fitted with numerous glass booths. The presiding magistrate will be enclosed in a booth while there is also a prosecutors’ and interpreters’ booth. Witnesses, accused persons and court recorders also have separate booths leaving no direct access to the gallery. JSC deputy secretary Mr Sithembinkosi Msipha told a news crew during celebration of JSC day in Hwange recently that the project will be rolled over to other courts countrywide. “As we forge ahead with improving access to our courts, we want to make sure everyone is safe. So far we have done Harare, Gweru and Hwange courts,” he said. The country’s courts have not been allowing crowds into the gallery during the lockdown period to protect citizens and court staff from spreading or contracting the deadly virus. Meanwhile, Mr Msipha said construction of Lupane Magistrates’ Court which will be Matabeleland North’s provincial courts, is back on full throttle after being disturbed by Covid-19. Several courthouses are under construction countrywide as JSC undertook to refurbish courtrooms and construct new courthouses in an effort to improve access to justice. Mr Msipha said the Lupane Court which will be the second biggest after Chinhoyi Magistrates’ Courts where a double storey structure is being constructed will be ready before the end of the year. “We are happy with progress so far as we have done good work. Construction is now on full throttle and we are attending to roofing now,” he said. Treasury is funding the projects. — @ncubeleon