The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
UP-AND-COMING fine artist, Marvellous Munashe Chitsa wants to change the face of art in the city by building an empire that will command respect and also set up an arts academy through his WeCan Paintings brand. The brand which celebrated its first anniversary last week specialises in house painting, wall art, body art, canvas drawing and paper art.
Chitsa who has been painting for over 10 years said he wants to groom other up-and-coming artists as he has learnt a lot over the years. “I ventured into fine arts professionally on June 1 last year although I’ve been doing art since I was five-years-old. My vision is to build an African-owned powerhouse arts and painting company through which we’ll move in to commercialise art. “I also want to groom and add value to talented people in the arts by mentoring them so as to help them create a legacy with their gifts,” said the Pumula East-bred artiste. Chitsa said they are in the process of compiling the art they have done over the past year as a way of reflecting on their journey. In celebrating their anniversary, WeCan Paintings held a business seminar last Saturday where they invited different players. “We held a business seminar that was attended by brands that included Geek Technology, Sparkely Fashion and Sportswear and Golide Banali. We shared experiences and advice on our line of art. The idea was to find ways to revive the lost hope and inspire young people to not only dream, but take the first step,” Chitsa said. He said he was inspired to take up art as a profession after realising how artists were being undervalued. This is why he wants to change the way people perceive artists. “What drove me to take up art as a profession are the problems that artists face throughout their careers and when they die. Their art is not really valued and it’s not protected from manipulation. Their job is not really taken as a profession as well. “I also realised how the black society is taking art as a hobby thus I decided to work hard to build an empire that will serve as an example that art is a valuable gift,” said Chitsa. -@mthabisi_mthire