The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
KWAITO lyricist Delaney “Diliza” Dondo who had been down for a while due to illness is now back in the music game, producing music and performing in South Africa. Not wasting time, Diliza who is famed for the Umcimbi hit, has set up a music record company, Progressive Records, whose purpose will be to scout for talent in South Africa and Zimbabwe. Progressive Records that was registered in the UK, is owned by UK-based Bongizwe Masuku, Mthokozisi Magutshwa and Morgan Nkaleng, who are Diliza’s partners. The wordsmith is, however, still under South Africa’s Kwaito legend, Professor’s Proper Files record label. Speaking from his Midrand base in South Africa, Diliza said he has fully recovered from a chest infection which halted his career in 2020. “I’m now 100 percent fit and ready to work. I recently set up a recording label called Progressive Records where I partnered with guys in the UK. At the moment, we’re working on releasing my follow-up single to Ngekaban’ LeParty which was our debut track as a music label. “In the coming single, I’ll be working with my boss and mentor Professor Langa. It should be out by September,” said an optimistic Diliza. He said in the pipeline as well is a project that will see him return home to work closely with the country’s talented artistes if all goes according to plan. “There’s a project that I’m working on that will require me to be home (Zimbabwe) most of the time. I’ll soon share its details if the deal goes through.” The Progressive Records label, Diliza said, has since signed its first artiste, Bulawayo-based fast-rising kwaito gem, Fab G Umshana kagogo. “We’re working on releasing a single by Fab G Umshana kagogo under Progressive Records as he’s the first artiste that we’ve signed,” said the Luveve-bred superstar. “Quizzed about his preparedness to run the record label, Diliza said: “Being a boss demands a lot of focus. It’s hard to deal with artistes,” he said as he chuckled. “But as an artiste myself, I’m up for the challenge as I understand them. I know the situation now is bad because of the Covid-19 pandemic where there’re no gigs, but we’ll do all we can to ensure we keep the music industry alive by producing good music.” – @mthabisi_mthire