The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
PARTNERSHIPS between diasporans and members of the community have yielded positive results in Bulilima District where 20 clinics and eight schools are under construction with five of the schools set to be operational by next year. The projects are part of efforts by the stakeholders to improve access to health care services and also reduce distances travelled by school pupils. In an interview, Bulilima Rural District Council Chief Executive Officer Mr John Brown Ncube said community members had taken the lead in ensuring development in their areas while the local authority was providing technical advice. He said some of the ongoing projects had received cash injections from donors and political leaders among other partners. “Development within communities is key but the major challenge are finances for various projects. As a local authority we are encouraging people to take up the initiative of spearheading development in their areas. The district has recorded good response because at the moment there are 20 clinics and eight schools under construction. The projects are at various stages of completion. Five of the schools are expected to open at the beginning of next year. “For most of the projects the communities mobilised resources working with local business people and diasporans who come from their areas. In other projects we have Non-Governmental Organisations funding the projects, political leaders and hunters among other partners. As a local authority we offer technical advice to the communities. In all these projects the communities approached us stating the kind of projects they wanted to implement,” he said. Mr Ncube invited other stakeholders and partners to assist communities with funding to complete some of the projects. He said communities have also been urged to rehabilitate old and dilapidated infrastructure such as schools and clinics. Mr Ncube said efforts were underway to rehabilitate Mabhongwane Dam. He said once the dam was rehabilitated then Mabhongwane Irrigation will be rehabilitated. “We are awaiting funding for this project. We also want to involve diasporans because we have seen the power of private public partnerships in development,” he said. Headman Mahunu (Sikhumbuzo Ngwenya) from Bulilima said since Government did not have adequate funds to finance projects people should complement its efforts. “This development that we are advocating for benefits us as communities. It’s our children who are dropping out of school because there are no schools nearby. It’s our families and relatives that are suffering because of long distances walked to clinics. — @DubeMatutu