The Chronicle Leonard Ncube , Victoria Falls Reporter
ZIMBABWE will host the 9th edition of the Africa Public Service Day conference in 2023. This follows the successful 8th edition held here in the midst of strict Covid-19 restrictions, with public service ministers resolving to push for an Africa that is built through focused and ethical leadership. The three-day conference which was opened by Vice President Costantino Chiwenga on Monday, ended on Wednesday. Thirty delegates comprising public service experts, government officials and ministers from across the continent physically attended the conference while scores of others, including VP Chiwenga, participated virtually in adherence to Covid-19 restrictions. Delegates concurred that Africa needs inclusivity through arts and culture while adoption and deployment of information communication technologies to sustain service delivery is key to attaining the “Africa We want” drive. The general feeling at the meeting was the need for one voice in denouncing corruption and all its vices, promoting cultural diversity and inclusivity as well as embracing change. In his closing remarks Public Service, Labour and Social Welfare Minister Professor Paul Mavima said the historic conference, coming in the middle of the global pandemic, had opened the continent’s mind on the route to pursue to address challenges emanating from emergencies and pandemic such as cyclones, drought and lately Covid-19. “I want to urge AU to continue to promote commemorations that seek to promote our values. “This has been an opportunity for governments to grow stronger in terms of ability in developing approaches going forward, for example the amazing manner in which we have started generating our own resources. “Our wish was to host as many people as possible but Covid-19 would not allow that. Our wish to host again has been granted by our colleagues and I humbly accept that honour of hosting again. We will take it to Cabinet and we will start preparing for the conference that is going to come in 2023,” said Prof Mavima. Representatives from African Union Commission for Political Affairs, Peace and Security, Ministers and delegations, among others from different countries attended. The theme was: “Building the Africa We Want, through embracing an ethical culture that underpins purpose driven leadership in the Context of a Crisis.” In a communique, the conference resolved that the occasion should be used as a platform to reflect and recognise the work of public servants and create a platform for sharing and exchanging experiences on best public service delivery practices on the continent. It was also resolved that Covid-19 should be viewed as an opportunity to reimagine, shape and institute purpose driven leadership to build the Africa We Want through ethical leadership. The commitment and resilience of frontline workers mostly public service workers during Covid-19 crisis was commended, together with the need to recognise and reward their performance, noting that a disgruntled employee cannot be productive. The pandemic has claimed more than 3 million lives worldwide and transformed the way of conducting business in both the public and private spheres. There is a need to blend indigenous knowledge systems with contemporary scientific approaches in public administration and deliberate policies should be formulated and implemented to promote diversity and creativity in public administration in all countries. — @ncubeleon