The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE Warriors now have a chance to fine-tune their squad ahead of the Fifa World Cup qualifiers in September after Cosafa announced that the draw for the 20th edition of the men’s competition will be held at the Nelson Mandela Bay, Eastern Cape, South Africa tomorrow. Doubts abounded whether the Cosafa Cup would be held this year due to a surge in Covid-19 infections in southern Africa, but organisers are confident of staging the tournament from July 7-18. Continental football governing body Caf postponed World Cup qualifiers and the 2022 Africa Cup of Nations draw that had been scheduled for later this month. “The draw for the 2021 Cosafa Cup will be staged in host city Nelson Mandela Bay on June 17 as preparations for the historic 20th edition of the regional showpiece competition kick into gear. The 12-team tournament will take place from July 7-18 and returns after the 2020 edition had to be cancelled due to the Covid-19 pandemic. The draw will be live on www.cosafa.tv from 11am when the fate of the competing teams will be decided. And there will be plenty of excitement with the addition of west African powerhouse Senegal to the field this year as they make a guest appearance in what is a landmark tournament for Cosafa,” said Cosafa in a statement. Zifa did not organise any friendly matches for the Warriors during the recent Fifa international window citing financial constraints.
Zifa said the astronomical amounts involved in organising matches during a pandemic against the backdrop of funding a national team had also forced the national association to select matches that benefit the team, while the association remained sustainable. The Warriors have won the Cosafa Cup six times, with the last triumph coming in 2018. The Cosafa Cup has over the years launched the careers of a number of top stars from the region and continues to be a major driver of football development on and off the pitch for not just players, but coaches, match officials and administrators. “The competition will take on a new format for 2021, with the 12 teams split into three groups, each containing four teams. This ensures each side will play a minimum of three matches. The top team in each pool as well as the best second-placed finisher will advance to the semi-finals. There will be no Plate competition. “Senegal is the top-ranked side in Africa and sit at number 22 in the world and will make their debut in the Cosafa competition. Guest nations from outside the region have over the years provided excellent entertainment and contrast in styles that makes for fascinating viewing. The other 10 sides confirmed so far are no strangers to the Cosafa Cup and include hosts South Africa, defending champions Zambia and record six-time winners Zimbabwe. Others are Botswana, Comoros Islands, Eswatini, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique and Namibia. The 12th team will be confirmed in the coming days with a number of interested parties,” said Cosafa. Those competing in the group stages of the 2022 Fifa World Cup qualifiers from September will be eager to use the tournament to fine-tune their preparations for a shot at making the finals in Qatar.