The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
AT 25 years of age, musician, songwriter and music producer, Poly Da Nqoe (real name Nqobile Polite Dube) is focusing on becoming a force to reckon with and go-to person for music production. Poly Da Nqoe who was born in Botswana and raised in Bulawayo rose to fame late last year after he clinched three awards (Best Male Artist, Album of the year and Best music producer) at the inaugural 2020 Pumula Royal Arts and Community Awards (Praca). Saturday Leisure caught up with the talented youngster from Pumula South who narrated how his love for music dates to over a decade. “I started doing music at the age of 14 in 2009 when I learnt how to create and combine different instruments. During my self-discovery, I established that God had given me talents in song-writing, playing drums and singing. “It was weird because during my childhood, I used to gather tins and play with them, something people found quite entertaining,” said Poly Da Nqoe. He said as years went by, he started embracing the digital space. “Gradually, I started to learn how to use a computer and it became easier for me to update my music skills. I used the Boom FL studio app and it was a great experience creating beats that sounded amazing. “In 2015, I left the country for South Africa. Life there wasn’t easy as I faced a lot of obstacles. But thanks to the Lord, in 2018, I found my feet and managed to open a music label, Mega Bass Entertainment. After this, I came up with my own sounds in various genres that included house, hip-hop and Afro-pop,” said Poly Da Nqoe. While in South Africa, he managed to interact with artistes, Tso, CMG music, Lu Hoody Santo Sent, Mlibazisi Ndebele and Richo among others, something that benefitted him as he got notes from them. “In 2019, I returned to Zimbabwe and the vibe was very low leaving me quite disheartened. Around April that year, I decided to change the game by hosting shows in search of talent from different neighbourhoods. “Through this talent search, I met artistes, Floppy X, The Pro, Mentor, Sammy C, Mandie SB, Noluntu, Acquillah K, Gold Berry and Collin Beats,” he said. “When I returned home, I had a great vision to push and promote artistes and I’m glad I managed to do so during my shows. However, lack of funds was a big challenge.” Last year, Poly Da Nqoe managed to release his debut album titled #Blvck Talent EP. It contained the Nkanyezi track that featured Lord Skills and landed the artiste on the Skyz Metro FM Top 20 music charts. Poly Da Nqoe said he has three albums which he is concurrently working on. Life after Lockdown, an Amapiano album due to be released next month. The other two are Uthando (Afro-pop) and New Wave (hip-hop). Turning to the Covid-19 pandemic that continues to affect the arts industry, Poly Da Nqoe said: “2020 was a tough year due to the pandemic that affected everyone worldwide as it led to lockdowns that stopped everything. The end of last year, however, interestingly opened doors in my career as I won three Praca awards. “I’d like to acknowledge the award’s organisers for promoting our participation in the arts industry at a time that most artistes were beginning to lose hope.” — @mthabisi_mthire