The Chronicle Boitumelo Makhurane, Chronicle Reporter
AN Organisation working with Persons living with Disabilities (PWDs) has welcomed the national disability policy which was launched last week which it says is a positive development that will benefit its members. The policy is part of Government efforts to ensure the development path and the National Development Strategy 1 (NDS1) is disability-inclusive and acknowledges Diaspora engagement. President Mnangagwa said people with disabilities should not be viewed as charity cases but as individuals capable of contributing to the development of the country like any other citizen. The National Disability Policy is a culmination of consultations between Government and representatives of persons living with disabilities that began when President Mnangagwa met them in 2018. The Disability Policy is meant to ensure that disability programmes are mainstreamed in Government institutions and activities as required by the Constitution. Zimbabwe was one of the first countries to ratify the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in 2013 and remain one of the few countries in Africa with legislation that specifically caters for people with disabilities. Disability Amalgamation Community Trust director Mr Henry Chivhanga applauded the policy saying it is a positive development as it will uplift the livelihoods of persons with disability. “People with disability have full rights like everyone else but unfortunately the world doesn’t recognise and treat them as equals. The policy will ensure that people with disabilities are fully represented and this will impact positively on their livelihoods,’’ he said. “By domesticating the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, Zimbabwe has put disability on its national agenda.’’ Mr Chivhanga appealed to Government to assist in mobilising resources for people living with disabilities to enable them to contribute meaningfully to economic development. “People living with disabilities are committed to playing their part in the country’s economic development while at the same time improving their welfare but are constrained by lack of resources,” said Mr Chivhanga. The disability policy will ensure that facilities such as ramps for those using wheelchairs and Braille for the visually impaired are availed as part of measures to ensure people living with disabilities realise their full potential. — @Boity104.