The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga , Senior Business Reporter
A TECHNICAL Working Group (TWG) on the joint industrialisation programme between Zimbabwe and Zambia has agreed to immediately set up committees comprising technocrats to jointly work on advancing different projects. The two neighbouring countries have agreed on an action matrix to guide the implementation of the programme and provide a timeframe for achieving the set targets. The programme, which is one of the key initiatives under the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (Comesa) bloc, is intended to promote industrial cooperation and increase competitiveness of goods produced within the two countries. Zimbabwe and Zambia recently signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) to form a Joint Industrialisation Cooperation Programme, aimed at facilitating deeper collaboration by setting up joint ventures. Priority sectors include agriculture and agro-processing, mining and mineral beneficiation, petrochemicals, fertilisers and pharmaceuticals, capital goods industries, textiles, forest and timber-based industries, building materials and knowledge economy, among others. “The TWG has also agreed to immediately establish committees comprised of technocrats from the ministries of industry, commerce, trade and agriculture to work jointly to advance the different pillars agreed in the Memorandum of Understanding,” said Comesa in a latest media update. Speaking at the 3rd Joint TWG meeting held virtually last Friday, Comesa assistant secretary general for programmes, Dr Kipyego Cheluget, said the Joint Zimbabwe-Zambia industrialisation programme holds the best promise towards achieving Comesa’s industrialisation goals. “In Comesa, we take this programme seriously as it will set the pace towards achieving the aspirations of the region as we regard it as a flagship project,” he was quoted as saying. Article 99 of the Comesa Treaty calls for member States to cooperate in the field of industrial development and to coordinate their policies in establishing agro-industries to achieve regional sustainable and inclusive economic transformation. The programme is also a tool for the implementation of the Comesa industrial strategy whose vision is to have a globally competitive environmental-friendly, diversified industrial sector which is based on innovation and manufacturing. These are viewed as critical tools for transforming regional resources into sustainable wealth and prosperity for all. — @okazunga