The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
THE Judicial Service Commission (JSC) has closed seven courthouses after members of staff tested positive to Covid-19. The closed courthouses are Chinhoyi Magistrates’ Court, Karoi Magistrates’ Court, Kariba Magistrates’ Court, Bindura Magistrates’ Court, Mutare Magistrates’ Court, and Mutare High Court and Mt Darwin Magistrates’ Court. The number of High Court Judges, magistrates and members of staff who have tested Covid 19 could not be ascertained.
JSC secretary Mr Walter Chikwanha confirmed the development yesterday. He said they were in the process of consulting with the Ministry of Health and Child Care on the way forward. Mr Chikwanha said the seven courthouses have been closed for purposes of fumigation, testing of more staff and contact tracing of all the people who may have come into contact with the cases. “Litigants and legal practitioners who may want to file any papers at these courts may get in touch with the Registrar, Resident Magistrate, Additional Sheriff or Assistant Master on duty. Their numbers will be displayed at the respective courthouses,” he said. Mr Chikwanha said the courthouses will re-open soon since all negative Judges, magistrates and staff will return to work after fumigation, testing of staff and contact tracing. “It’s just the closure for the purposes of fumigation and testing. The negative ones will go back to work soon. In the meantime, the public will be advised when the concerned courts will be re-opening,” he said. The country yesterday recorded 519 new infections and six deaths. Mashonaland West province recorded the highest number of infections with 228 cases. Midlands had the second highest number of new infections after 65 cases were recorded in the province, Harare had the third highest figures at 62 infections and Masvingo followed with 44 new Covid-19 cases. Bulawayo province recorded 33 new infections, Matabeleland North and Mashonaland Central both recorded 24, Manicaland recorded 22, Mashonaland East 12 and Matabeleland South had the least after recording five cases. The Ministry of Health and Child Care daily report notes that four deaths were recorded in Midlands while Bulawayo and Mashonaland Central recorded a death each.