The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter THE Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission (Zacc) has since the beginning of the year arrested more than 100 people for corruption amid calls by the Commission for policy makers to expedite the enactment of the whistleblowers legislation following reports of victimisation of whistleblowers. Out of the 103 arrests made so far, 79 dockets have already been submitted to the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) for prosecution. Zacc is targeting to submit 180 dockets to the National Prosecution Authority this year, a 100 percent increase from the number achieved in 2020. In a statement, Zacc chairperson Justice Loyce Matanda-Moyo urged policy makers to speed up the enactment of the whistleblowers legislation as Zimbabwe joined the rest of the world in observing World Whistleblowers Day on Wednesday. World Whistleblowers Day is commemorated on June 23 every year and its primary goal is to raise public awareness about the important role that whistleblowers play in combating corruption. A whistleblower is an individual who exposes any activity that is illegal, unethical, or not correct within an organisation. “As the world commemorates this important day, Zacc urges policymakers to expedite the enactment of the whistleblowers legislation. Already, Zacc has received reports of victimisation of whistleblowers that are vital to the nation’s fight against corruption,” said Justice Matanda-Moyo. “The Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission, in its relentless fight against the cancer, recognises the important role played by whistleblowers.” Justice Matanda-Moyo said despite their obligations to fully protect whistleblowers within the provisions of the United Nations Convention against Corruption, the African Union Convention against Corruption and the Sadc Protocol against Corruption, there is still a legal vacuum in the full protection of whistleblowers. Justice Matanda-Moyo said the Commission is advocating for the necessary policy and legal environment that fully protects whistleblowers. “Part of these efforts includes drafting a Lay Bill which has been submitted to the Attorney General’s Office. We are fully confident that this piece of legislation will be enacted into law sooner rather than later,” she said. ZACC has come up with an online whistleblower reporting application to ensure that whistleblowers are able to report corruption. The application is designed to ensure full anonymity of the whistleblowers. Justice Matanda-Moyo said this year alone, Zacc has received 88 anonymous reports on corrupt activities though the online platform. “The National Anti-Corruption Strategy (NACS) Steering Committee has established a sub-committee that is dedicated to ensuring the full protection of whistleblowers. To the whistleblowers, always remember that speaking up against corruption is crucial for a just world,” she said.