The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
THE election of Pan African Postal Union (PAPU) secretary general and deputy was characterised by fierce debate as member states disagreed on the eligibility for voting. One hundred and twenty nine delegates from 25 African Union countries, according to Information Communication Technologies (ICT), Postal and Courier Services Minister Dr Jenfan Muswere, attended the week-long 10th Ordinary Session of the elective Plenipotentiary Conference and 39th Ordinary Session of the Papu Administrative Council conference which was officially opened by President Mnangagwa here yesterday afternoon. Delegates were expected to immediately elect new office bearers for the secretary general and assistant secretary general positions after the official opening ceremony but a fierce debate ensued as participants argued over the eligibility of some countries to vote. The debate started soon after the presentation of a report by the credentials committee which stated that Benin, Tunisia, Malawi and Morocco were ineligible to vote as they have not paid annual contributions to PAPU for more than two consecutive years. Mali withdrew its candidate on Tuesday for failing to meet some requirements. The committee which was tasked with adjudicating on member countries and candidates’ eligibility also said Egypt had been disqualified as its candidate filed an application after the closing date which had been set for March 11, 2020, while the application was also incomplete. PAPU secretariat received a request from Egypt on May 2, 2020 seeking extension of deadline but the request was turned down as this would have led to protest from other candidates, according to the credentials committee report. The call for applications was sent six months before the cut-off date. For more than three hours up to 8pm, delegates debated about Morocco and Mali and more than once, the chair for the session, Dr Muswere and PAPU secretariat had to caucus and also seek advice from the organisation’s legal team. The credentials team said Article 22 of PAPU which relates to payment of contributions, states that a member with two consecutive years without paying contributions forfeits the right to vote. The committee said 23 countries qualified to vote. The requirements for individual candidates are to: hail from a member state that has made full contribution to AU, application for election filed officially by the member state, be on leave three months prior to the election, be at least 35 years and below 65 years, certified medically fit, have at least a degree, have at least 10 years experience in the postal industry, five of which are on managerial position, speak at least one language of record in the continent, not been prosecuted or convicted of any criminal offence. Zimbabwe’s candidate Mr Sifundo Chief Moyo who is postmaster general met the requirements leaving him to contest unchallenged. This will however depend on the outcome of debate and if Egypt accepts disqualification. All the three candidates for the assistant secretary general post Messrs. Amadou Abdou Waziri and Sibiri Michel Kabre of Niger and Burkina Faso and Ms Jesica of Uganda met the requirements. Morocco exceptionally requested to be allowed to vote saying the country had made a commitment to pay its dues. This stirred debate as member states felt it would amount to flouting of set rules. “We want to commend the credentials committee. It is very important to uphold rules because they were made for a reason. Yes, we are in Covid-19 period but we want growth and we are building which require monetary funding. PAPU relies on contributions of member states and if we start changing rules to suit individual countries, we may end up in a worse situation than now,” said a delegate from Zambia. Dr Muswere also weighed in. “As members we have to respect rules. We appreciate what they are trying to do but if you haven’t paid contributions no voting. With regards to Benin, the same applies as they are not accredited so they are not going to vote. We make rules and we can’t be seen breaking them,” he said. Some said there was no basis eliminating Mali from election process while others said Morocco should also be allowed to vote. The legal team implored member states to be mindful of the fact that PAPU was not an organ of AU but a specialised body which is not funded through AU budget. They said the membership of PAPU is open to members of AU hence there is a relationship between the two. No decision had been made by 8pm. — @ncubeleon