The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
THE decentralisation of lower courts to every district in the country has started with seven provincial cities expected to have High Court stations within the next four years in line with the National Development Strategy1(NDS1) of ensuring an efficient and effective justice delivery. Recently, the Judicial Service Commission (JSC) gazetted Inyathi and Chimanimani as resident courts in line with its 2021-2025 strategic plan, which was launched by President Mnangagwa last year. The President said the JSC was critical in the country’s drive to develop and achieve targets set in Vision 2030. The strategic plan is expected to provide a framework on how to tackle corruption, development of infrastructure and the provision of rule of law among other things. Speaking in Parliament during a question-and-answer session on Wednesday, Justice, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Minister Ziyambi Ziyambi said the JSC is in the process of decentralising lower courts to every district by 2025. He said as part of the decentralising the High Court, JSC will also set up High Court offices in at least seven provincial cities. “The Judicial Service Commission is in the process of decentralising lower courts to every district and at least seven provincial cities must have High Court offices by the year 2025. “One of the set goals of the JSC provided for in the NDS1 is to ensure an efficient and effective justice delivery through the establishment of resident magistrate courts in every district by the year 2025,” said Minister Ziyambi. Responding to a question by Bubi MP Solomon Mguni who asked him on the construction of permanent court buildings at Bubi District, Minister Ziyambi said: “Currently there is a court in Nkayi which is 80km from Bubi that can provide service to the residents of Bubi. However, Government will continue making efforts to ensure that there are resident courts in every district in order to limit the distance travelled by people in accessing justice.” Minister Ziyambi said Government is working tirelessly to meet the targets set out in the NDS1 by the year 2025. He said construction of resident courts and prisons and correctional facilities is on the priority list. “The NDS1 outlines the policy direction and strategic thrust of the country over the next five years. It identifies priority programmes/projects to be executed. I am pleased to announce that infrastructure and utility development is one of the priority projects that the Government is aiming to achieve by year 2025,” said Minister Ziyambi. “On that note, Government departments, Ministries and other State institutions are working together to achieve infrastructure development in every province of the country.” Minister Ziyambi said his Local Government and Public Works counterpart, Minister July Moyo recently agreed to transfer the Inyathi Old Prison structures, which are currently being utilised as offices by the Public Works Department to the Zimbabwe Prisons and Correctional Service (ZPCS). “The Zimbabwe Prisons and Correctional Service is ready to commence rehabilitation of Old Inyathi Prison structures into a modern correctional institution. “The resources for the renovation of Old Inyathi Prison structures have already been secured,” he said. “Currently, we are waiting on the Ministry of Local Government and Public Works to move their office furniture to pave way for us to begin renovations.” — @mashnets