The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
GOVERNMENT plans to introduce mechanised agriculture under the Pfumvudza/Intwasa farming concept to improve efficiency and boost national food security. Lands, Agriculture, Fisheries, Water and Rural Resettlement Minister, Dr Anxious Masuka, said this last Thursday in a speech read on his behalf by Agritex acting director, Mr Stancilae Tapererwa at the launch of the 2021 Winter Wheat Programme at Valley Irrigation Scheme in Kezi, Matobo District . The Pfumvudza/Intwasa initiative was introduced last year to boost food production and is credited for contributing to the bumper harvest this year. The Second Round of Crop and Livestock Assessment Report for 2020/2021 shows maize yield is estimated at 2,7 million tonnes from 907 528 in the prior year. “The ministry is now engaging private players, those who manufacture planters, small tractors and so on. So, very soon we are going to launch the Pfumvudza/Intwasa mechanised programme where it will be easy for you now to embark on Pfumvudza/Intwasa without labouring much,” he said. Interview later, Mr Tapererwa said the Pfumvudza/Intwasa programme was successful as it has contributed significantly to the 2,7 million tonnes of maize this year. “The programme has contributed a lot to food sufficiency. The complaint that we got from farmers is that its labour intensive. They had to dig the holes using hoes while they have cattle. “We are now working with private equipment suppliers who have come up with small tractors and planters and we are in the process of developing a concept to identify people who can acquire this machinery and offer services in the communities where they stay, of course for a fee so that programme is sustainable,” he said. Mr Tapererwa said the Government was also considering a Presidential Programme to acquire farming equipment at ward or village level to make it easy for the farmers to have access to the machinery. Meanwhile, the number of plots under the Intwasa concept are expected to be increased from three to five with farmers given inputs for free to boost production. Plans are also under way to produce fodder grass at irrigation schemes to boost livestock farming especially in Matabeleland South. The Government has also sourced motor bikes through a partnership arrangement with the private sector to enhance extension services. One company has already partnered Government and donated 60 motorbikes to Matabeleland South for use by Agritex officers. Of the 60 motorbikes, 27 went to Matobo District. Dr Masuka said the Agricultural Rural Development Authority (Arda) was there to partner farmers in order to increase crop production through irrigation expansion. He noted the importance of Public-Private Partnerships such as the Valley Irrigation Scheme joint venture with Gredcorp managing director Mr Deane Le Roux. Through their partnership, Valley Irrigation Scheme has put 50 hectares under pecan nuts and 90ha will be put under winter wheat. The new winter wheat planting deadline is today. The Government is targeting to plant 92 000ha this winter season comprising 85 000ha for wheat and 7 000ha for barley. — @okazunga.