The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter WASHINGTON Arubi capped the DStv Premier Soccer League 2020/21 season in style after being named the Nedbank Cup Player of the Tournament and pocketing R150 000 in prize money at the awards night on Sunday. Due to Covid-19 protocols, the PSL held a virtual awards ceremony. The gong was the third most prestigious after the Footballer of the Season accompanied by R250 000 and the DStv Players’ Player of the Season (R200 000), which were both won by Mamelodi Sundowns’ Peter Shalulile. The Zimbabwean goalie, Arubi who was named the Nedbank Cup goalkeeper of the tournament after leading his South African side Tshakhuma Tsha Madzivhandila (TTM) to the Nedbank Cup with a 1-0 win over Chippa United in the final last month, was a key figure for TTM throughout the season. He kept four clean sheets in five games in the Nedbank Cup campaign. His brilliant run started with TTM beating his former paymasters SuperSport United 1-0 in the Round of 32. Arubi conceded two goals in the tournament, the 2-2 draw with Swallows, in the last 16, of the tourney. He, however, went on to play a starring role in the penalty shootout by stopping two spot kicks in their 4-3 win. The former Lancashire Steel, Highlanders and Dynamos’ shot stopper kept another clean sheet in the 2-0 win over Black Leopards in the quarter-finals, before frustrating favourites Sundowns in the semi-finals where he pulled a number of top drawer saves. The match statistics showed that Sundowns had 12 shots at goal, seven of which were on target, yet they failed to find a breakthrough for 120 minutes, thanks to Arubi’s athleticism. Again, the highlight of that match came in the spot kicks when he brilliantly dived to his right to block Hlompho Kekana’s firmly struck spot kick to secure a shock 6-5 victory at Loftus Versfeld in Pretoria. In the final against Chippa, Arubi was in an uncompromising mood in guarding his goal to inspire TTM to their maiden cup glory and secure a Caf Confederations Cup ticket. Full list of winners PSL Footballer of the Season – Peter Shalulile (Mamelodi Sundowns) DStv Premiership Player’s Player of the Season – Peter Shalulile (Mamelodi Sundowns) DStv Premiership Coach of the Season – Benni McCarthy (AmaZulu) DStv Premiership Young Player of the Season (Under-21) – Evidence Makgopa (Baroka) DStv Premiership Goalkeeper of the Season – Denis Onyango (Mamelodi Sundowns) DStv Premiership Defender of the Season – Njabulo Ngcobo (Moroka Swallows) DStv Premiership Midfielder of the Season – Themba Zwane (Mamelodi Sundowns) DStv Premiership Goal of the season – Teboho Mokoena (SuperSport United) DStv Premiership Top Goalscorer: – Bradley Grobler (SuperSport United) – 16 Goals MTN8MTN8 Last Man Standing – Deon Hotto (Orlando Pirates) NEDBANK CUPNedbank Cup Most Promising Player (Under 23) – Khanyisa Mayo (Richards Bay) Nedbank Cup Player of the Tournament – Washington Arubi (Tshakhuma Tsha Madzivhandila) -@ZililoR