The Chronicle Lovemore Dube
THE might of Highlanders FC in its 95 years of existence should also be measured by the opposition that it has faced. From its days in the Bulawayo Amateur (African) Football Association league up to 1968 when it joined ranks with national association football, Bosso has had formidable opposition on its path which includes Mashonaland United, Cobras, City Pirates, BSAP, Rangers, Rex, Bulawayo Wanderers, Eastlands, Eastern Brothers, Black Horrors, Old Miltonians, AmaZulu, Railstars, Olympics, Meikles to mention a few. There have also been iconic players in the opposition that worked so hard on the pitch to stop the Amahlolanyama charge on match day. The 1980s (1984 to 1988) represent a colourful page of the club’s 95 years when the club swept all silverware on the table except the league title. Great stars were unleashed to expectant crowds on stadia around Zimbabwe and some would even make an impact beyond the borders and these include Madinda Ndlovu, Willard Khumalo, Mercedes Sibanda and Alexander Maseko. Today Chronicle Sport speaks to Ephraim ‘The Rock of Gilbratar’ Chawanda. A colossal figure in the Zimbabwe Saints and Warriors defence, Chawanda is among the Golliath figures to face Highlanders in its history. The 1988 Soccer Star of the Year, Chibuku Trophy and league winner, has described the tussles for possession between his teammate Josphat Humbasha and dazzling Madinda Ndlovu as epic. Humbasha was a hard tackler, good with his eyes on the ball but cheeky in that he would seemingly deliberately go for the man to frustrate his opponent. With Madinda a menace on either wing and even when he cut-in with his body swerve and eletric pace, with a cheering full to the rafters Barbourfields Stadium, Humbasha had one ace up the sleeve, rough play. The Bosso legend where he felt it was deliberate would blow his fuse and be out of the game. That way Saints would have disabled the livewire leaving odds even for a positive result either way. “The biggest duel on the field was always between Josphat Mazhambe Humbasha versus Madinda Khathazile Ndlovu. There was never any love lost between the two,” said Chawanda. Talking about the build up to the derbies against Highlanders, Chawanda said the tie was always an opportunity for either team to earn bragging rights. “On that week, one would always pity the coaches as all players would return from injury and excel at training and be on top form. Yes, there would be worrying knocks earned from serious tackles meant to show the coaches that one is ready to take on Bosso,” said the Chikwata and Warriors legend who formed a formidable defence partnerships in his career with the likes of Misheck Sibanda at Chikwata, Alexander Maseko and Francis Shonhayi in the Warriors before his talent took him to Germany and South Africa’s Orlando Pirates. Chawanda said the centre of attraction was In-Sport a leading sports good shop along Jason Moyo St in Bulawayo. Chikwata’s tearaway winger Joseph Machingura worked there with Bosso defence stalwart Douglas Mloyi. Their boss was Zimbabwe Saints manager. “Fans of both teams would occasionally pass remarks against the other in the build up predicting who would get a hiding,” said Chawanda. He also spoke of another departed football hero Roger Russell. The fitness guru had a habit of frustrating Bosso fans and players by instructing his defenders to chop their opposition forwards. “As for Roger Russell one always knew that Tuesday physical training would be hell. “Once you fall out you lose out. His motto was:’ Go through the ball and through the man’,” said Chawanda. He also spoke of the crowds. “The crowd on match day day was always livid with excitement. Some of my friends from Matshobana would turn on me as they were pro-Bosso, unprintable insults would be hurled at us from the terraces, especially Soweto. “At Saints coach Tendai Chieza had instilled in us that we should take every insult as a positive encouragement to soldier on. “He used to say that the Bosso majority in the stadium could not come to kick the ball on the field, it would always be 11 v 11,” said Chawanda. Chawanda will always be remembered for the way he shut out Bosso in the 1988 Chibuku Trophy won by his side. But he and his defence partners could do little to stop Bosso from winning the Rothmans Shield the same year. He played alongside Misheck Sibanda, Josphat Munetsi, Garikayi Rwodzi, Josphat Humbasha, Jethro Humbasha and Stanley Mutasa in one of the best defences and anchormen partnerships. Chawanda will be among those to testify that facing Madinda Ndlovu, Morgan Phiri, Tanny Banda, Tito Paketh, David Phiri, Tobias Mudyambanje and Dumisani Ngulube was an insurmountable task. So Highlanders FC’s 95 years have created legends among its opponents.