The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
Victoria Falls City Council has reportedly made an about-turn on its decision to abandon its only football facility Chinotimba Stadium, with the city fathers now undertaking to start renovation work on the venue to bring it to PSL standard. At a recently held Provincial Economic Planning workshop in the city, delegates insisted that all features of a city such as standard sport recreation facilities must be included. “The council then apprised the delegates that the refurbishment of Chinotimba Stadium will be under way soon, as it also emerged that the Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC) and the Ministry (of Sports) at provincial level were never consulted or at least informed about the decision of council to abandon Chinotimba Stadium. We can’t talk of high or podium performance athletes from the province without supporting infrastructure,” said one delegate at the workshop. Announcing the decision to abandon the facility last month, council said the stadium had ceased to serve its purpose. Victoria Falls town clerk Ronnie Dube then said council was making efforts to identify land and development partners to build a proper stadium that can promote sports tourism. However, three years ago, council had come up with a masterplan, which included upgrading Chinotimba Stadium into a 10 000-seater multi-purpose facility with a football pitch, a triathlon track, discus, netball, volleyball, long and triple jump facilities, and was looking for investors. Zimbabwe Rugby Union also once approached the Victoria Falls council seeking to upgrade Chinotimba Stadium into a multi-disciplinary sport facility to host a variety of activities but got a cold shoulder from the city fathers. Some investors have expressed interest in constructing a motor racing course and bring the Grand Prix to Victoria Falls. Government also has plans to turn Victoria Falls into its conference capital, with state-of-the-art facilities ranging from five to seven-star hotels, recreational, banking and sporting facilities, and is courting investors.