The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter ZIMBABWE Cricket fast bowler Kyle Jarvis has announced his retirement from all forms of cricket owing to injury and illness over the past one and a half years. Jarvis (32), who has not played international cricket since January 2020, made the shock announcement on Thursday. Besides the lower back injury he sustained in January 2020, the fast bowler also had Covid-19, malaria and tick bite fever at the same time. “It was a very difficult decision having to retire and it’s something that took me a long time to come to grips with. Nobody wants to stop doing the thing they love,” Jarvis said. “After my back injury last year, there was a lot of uncertainty whether I would be able to bowl again. After six to eight months out, I was lucky enough to make a full recovery, but I knew I had to start planning for the future.” In August 2013, Jarvis quit international cricket to play County cricket for Lancashire in England. After a successful stint in the County game, he returned to the Zimbabwe national team in September 2017. Jarvis retires after taking 132 wickets from 84 international matches. That haul includes 46 wickets in 13 Tests, 58 wickets in 49 ODIs and 28 wickets in 22 T20Is. He also played 84 first-class matches, taking a total of 320 wickets. “Every day wearing the Zimbabwe badge is a highlight and I was very fortunate to be able to represent my country over a 10-year career. I will miss walking out onto the field in an international with a close group of friends. A special thank you to my friends, family, Zimbabwe Cricket and Lancashire County Cricket Club for all the support over the years.” The son of former Zimbabwe international Malcolm Jarvis, the seamer is looking to get involved in the game in another capacity in the near future, but for now he wants to focus on a personal business venture. “I have a business which is fairly new which needs my full attention for now, but I look forward to working with Zimbabwe Cricket in some capacity going forward. I certainly want to give back to the game which gave me so much.”