The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
THE Bulawayo Chamber of Small to Medium Enterprises (SMEs) has embarked on capacity-building programmes with members in preparation for the forthcoming Zimbabwe International Trade Fair (ZITF) scheduled for next month. The country’s largest global exhibition returns this year after being suspended in 2020 due to Covid-19 lockdown. It will be held at the Zimbabwe International Exhibition Centre in Bulawayo between 20 and 23 July. Bulawayo Chamber of SMEs co-ordinator, Mr Nketha Mangoye Dlamini, said they were engaging their SMEs clusters to take advantage of the ZITF window. “In terms of the preparations for the ZITF we’re trying to build the capacity of SMEs in the province in as far as imports, production, marketing and business linkages is concerned,” he told Business Chronicle. “Currently, we have been moving around to SMEs clusters at the Old CSC Complex, OK Mart, Kelvin West and Beverly Court in so far as trying to make them ready for the trade fair.” Mr Dlamini said they were yet to compile the number of members that have registered to participate at this year’s ZITF but said the showcase presets huge opportunity for small businesses. “Just to give you a rough idea, when we went to Old CSC Complex, we spoke to about 40 or so members. At OK Mart, there are about 65 members, so I can say maybe 30 percent of that number is interested in participating,” he said. “The idea is that if they market themselves through the trade fair, we are really gunning for the big market size. “When we look at the ZITF and an SME displays his or her products, you are likely to attract local, national and maybe regional markets since we are likely to have other countries participating.” Meanwhile, nine countries have confirmed participation at the 61st edition of the ZITF while most of the exhibition space has been taken up. As at 20 May 2021, about 46 309 square metres out of 49 877 square metres exhibition space available for booking had been taken up. A total of 395 companies have expressed interest to exhibit at ZITF 2021, 94 of which were leaseholders and 52 were new exhibitors. A total of nine countries have confirmed their participation at the fair, while engagements with other nations were ongoing. The trade fair, which would be held under the theme: “The New Normal for Business and Industry: Realities and Opportunities,” will be officially opened by President Mnangagwa. The fair will be held in accordance with national and World Health Organisation Covid-19 prevention measures. — @okazunga.