The Chronicle Melissa Mpofu, Showbiz Editor
The two Zimbabwean groups representing the country at the Amazing Voices singing competition that is taking place in South Africa are still in a difficult position as they landed bottom three during last Sunday’s episode. They were fortunate to survive elimination as judges were once again, not too sold by their performances. Nigeria’s Eva Chorale was sent packing leaving five groups — South Africa’s Hush SA and Southern Six; Nigeria’s 121 Selah and the two Zimbabwean groups in the running for the US$100 000 prize money. No two ways, competition is getting stiffer with most of the remaining groups upping their performances with each passing week. But sadly for the country’s groups, they seem to be finding the going tough although they are soldiering on. Generally, their performances on Sunday were fair, but definitely below the mark as judges are now looking for a deserving group to hand over the title and grand prize. Effect, a group that hails from Bulawayo performed Langa Mavuso’s Mvula and the judges, although commending them for their improved performance, felt the performance was not worthy to make it to the finals. Judge Trigmatic said: “I’m expecting groups to bring out the best. At this point, there are no excuses as we’re going for the grand prize.”
Ammara Brown, commenting on the group’s performance said the vocal arrangements were better than last week. “Vocally, the arrangements were certainly better than last week. However, pitching issues were so evident. So I don’t know my guys, but to tell you the truth, it’s tough. “I love you guys, but I don’t know, it’s crunch time,” she said with a lot of concern. Judge Vusi Nova said the group was evidently developing cold feet, something that could be compromising their performances. “You guys look good, but I think we scared you last week. There were some pitching issues, but overall, I liked the sound. I think this time around, you listened to us.” Fila Tuju had no kind words for the boys. “You guys should just consider tweeting because you’re not serious with winning this competition. I’m telling you the truth. You’re not serious.” Said Trigmatic: “We’re getting to the finish line, but it also means bring your best. It doesn’t mean fight yourselves apart. Just work hard and enjoy what you’re doing so we can also enjoy.” At the end, Vusi Nova jokingly told the group to forget about Fila Tuju’s comments as they were doing just fine. Asked for his comment on Effects performance, show advisor, Zwai Bala said: “It may just be a bit too late, now it’s about going big for the money.” The second group from the country, Unveiled from Harare which performed a cover version of Tasha Cobbs Fill me up also did not convince the judges. Commenting on their performance, Vusi Nova said it was too busy as it had too many soloists instead of just one. “One of you guys should have taken the lead and improvised because you guys were doing the same thing throughout. But overall, the performance was good.” Concurring, Fila Tuju said: “It’s like you’re allowing in too many ideas at the same time for one song. The idea of having so many soloists was a big mistake. The choice of song, I feel, was a mistake because this song has many transitions. “If you continue playing around like that, you’ll go.” Trigmatic said he loved their rendition of the song as it was unique. Evelle said she felt they could have done better. “I feel like your control could have been better. At some point, I needed ad-libs and I couldn’t find them but overall, you guys brought it in well.” An emotional Ammara said Unveiled’s performance was too basic. “At this point, we can’t afford to be basic because I know you can do it,” she said with a disheartened tone. It is all eyes on the Zimbabwean groups tomorrow to see if they will have improved their acts as the competition is getting stiffer and the possibility of being eliminated is getting more real. The show that is taking place from Sun City will be shown on DStv’s Mzansi Magic and Zambezi Magic from 5PM.