The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
INVICTUS Energy, which is developing the Cabora Bassa oil and gas project in Muzarabani, has embarked on a recruitment drive targeting to employ 100 locals ahead of the firm’s seismic acquisition campaign. The seismic acquisition is a process of gathering subsurface vibrations during oil and gas development and used to determine location with higher chances of success for discovery of minerals. The Australia Stock Exchange-listed company said in a latest update that Polaris Natural Resources, a Canadian firm that was recently awarded the tender for the seismic campaign and is now mobilising staff from Canada for the project in Zimbabwe. “The company has commenced assisting Polaris with the recruitment of up to 100 local employees who will be involved in the seismic campaign, the vast majority of which are expected to come from within the local communities. “The camp construction will commence prior to the end of June and is expected to be completed in early July,” said Invictus. Already, Invictus has recorded key milestones on the Muzarabani oil and gas project including the conclusion of a petroleum exploration and production agreement with the Government. The agreement allows the company to negotiate a 25-year production licence following exploration, which should be finished by end of this year but is scheduled to begin around October. The seismic campaign is estimated to officially commence next month with line clearing operations and followed by seismic data acquisition. “The vibroseis units and recording equipment is currently in transit to Zimbabwe. The company intends to conduct, process, and interpret a minimum of 400-line kilometres of 2D seismic in order to refine the Muzarabani-1 drilling location and well path and identify additional prospectivity for the upcoming drilling campaign,” it said. The proposed seismic survey will be conducted with a minimal environmental footprint and utilise existing roads and tracks where possible. Invictus managing director Mr Scott Macmillan said their exploration programme was progressing well with the seismic acquisition campaign about to officially commence and preparations for the drilling campaign advancing well. “The strong interest from multiple drilling rig contractors places the company in a great position to secure an optimal rig for the drilling campaign at attractive rig rates. “We have had an overwhelming response in our local recruitment exercise and extremely pleased that we will be able to fill the majority of positions with people from the local community in keeping with the company’s strong commitment to community employment,” he said. Invictus Cabora Bassa project, which encompasses the Muzarabani prospect, is a multi-trillion cubic feet and liquids-rich conventional gas-condensate target, which is potentially the largest, undrilled seismically defined structure onshore Africa. — @okazunga.