The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
A player and an official from the same Premier Soccer League club missed this past weekend’s Chibuku Super Cup game after testing positive for Covid-19. Three Group A matches were played at the National Sports Stadium in Harare, with Dynamos edging Harare City 1-0 on Saturday, while Yadah recorded their first victory by beating Herentals 2-0 on the same day. ZPC Kariba and Caps United drew 0-0 on Sunday. Kennedy Ndebele, PSL chief executive officer confirmed that two cases were recorded at the weekend, bringing the total number of people that have tested positive for Covid-19 in football circles to three since Chibuku Super Cup games started last month.
The first player tested positive ahead of match-day two. “The Premier League has recorded two positive Covid-19 cases following routine tests conducted over the weekend of 12-13 June 2021. The individuals will follow the PSL, Zifa, SRC, Ministry of Health and Child Care, and WHO guidelines and protocols regarding self-isolation. The PSL urges all stakeholders to strictly adhere to Covid-19 protocols to prevent the spread of the virus,” reads a PSL statement. Th PSL wished all affected a speedy recovery and said it will not provide specific details on the club or individuals. The PSL medical committee, which is responsible for ensuring that clubs adhere to set Covid-19 standard operating procedures (SOP) at training grounds and on match days, has been resolute in plugging loopholes that might compromise strict adherence. The Premiership clubs are grouped into four pools for the tournament. Group A is made up of Caps United, Dynamos, Harare City, Herentals, Yadah and ZPC Kariba while Group B has Bulawayo Chiefs, Bulawayo City, Chicken Inn and Highlanders and their games are all played at Barbourfields Stadium. Group C comprises army sides Black Rhinos and Cranbourne Bullets, as well as Manica Diamonds and Tenax, and they play their games at Sakubva in Mutare while Mandava in Zvishavane is host to Group D that has FC Platinum, Ngezi Platinum Stars, Triangle United and Whawha. – @ZililoR