The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma , Showbiz Correspondent
BOUYED by the sudden demand for outdoor entertainment and restaurant services, a rising enterprise has been established at Mpopoma suburb’s business centre popularly known as koBango. With its rich history as a “meet and greet” spot for well-known personalities in the city, dating back to the liberation struggle era, the shops that were frequented by the late Sikhanyiso Ndlovu are turning a new tide with the emergence of a topnotch braai eatery. Running under the banner, The Meat Company, the tshisanyama and butchery is pushing the mantra “Inyama ebantwini/Nyama Kuvanhu”. Affordable meat is available with the area’s proprietor, Fanuel Tavavarigwa who started running the place in January this year saying he wants to redefine the myth that good outdoor tshisanyamas should be in posh places only. “We opened this joint sometime in January and we’ve been having challenges here and there, mostly due to the Covid-19-induced lockdowns. But now, looking at the fact that the lockdown is slowly easing, things are shaping up. “We’re on a drive of changing the face of Mpopoma through bringing that good outdoor and braai vibe to the suburb which has been overlooked by many,” said Tavavarigwa. He said they are right on track because of late, a lot of people have been flocking there. “Our aim is to bring people from all walks of life to the ghetto and put KoBango on the map as one of the most places to be if one decides to chill and relax.” Tavavarigwa said so far, the joint has employed over 10 locals and they are looking at bringing in more personnel through an expansion drive. “Employment has been created locally and we’re eager to hire more as we’re looking at expanding the business. Not only are we focusing on that line of business, but also arts and entertainment. “We hope that when the arts sector is fully opened, we can be able to even hold shows at the nearby community sports ground as we want to empower our artistes who’ve been hit hard by the pandemic,” he said. — @mthabisi_mthire.