The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
THE Zimbabwe Annual Mining Conference kicks off in Victoria Falls today with the event expected to unlock opportunities to steer the industry out of the turbulent times caused by Covid-19. Some delegates had started arriving in Victoria Falls yesterday afternoon ahead of the annual Indaba, which will be officially opened by President Mnangagwa tomorrow. The conveners of the mining conference, the Zimbabwe Chamber of Mines, came up with the theme: “Navigating turbulent times-Sustaining growth of the mining industry beyond Covid-19”, which the chamber president Mrs Elizabeth Nerwande-Chibanda said was apt in the foregoing. She said the first day, today, will be dedicated to a symposium that will chart a way forward on how Zimbabwe can unlock value and benefit from the country’s oil and gas potential, as well as another closed-door workshop on PGMs beneficiation. “Among the stakeholders participating at this year’s event are senior Government officials, senior executives from the private sector, suppliers, financiers and investors. This year’s edition comes at a time when the mining industry has been operating under difficult conditions on the back of the global Covid-19 pandemic, which has impacted negatively on the economy. Thus justifying our theme for this year’s Conference ‘Navigating Turbulent Times’ — Sustaining Growth of the Mining Industry in the midst of Covid-19. “The theme recognises the current Covid-19 induced challenges and the need to build resilience to enable the mining industry to grow even in the Covid-19 era,” she said in a brief to the media. President Mnangagwa will be the special guest of honour. “The conference programme is structured such that the second day will be dedicated to the main conference looking on a broader array of issues that affect the industry. In the planning of the event, we have taken all precautions to ensure that it does not spread Covid-19,” she said. Some of the speakers will be Minister of Mines and Mining Development Winston Chitando, his Finance and Economic Development counterpart Professor Mthuli Ncube, an advisor on mining from Ghana and an expert from Namibia. Matabeleland North Minister of State for Provincial Affairs and Devolution Richard Moyo will also attend. The other talking points will be around platinum beneficiation with the aim of seeking to maximise benefits through optimal platinum beneficiation. One of the major discussion areas will be mobilising funding for the mining industry, building strong institutions and enablers for sustainable mining growth. This conference comes at a time when the Government is implementing policies towards a US$12 billion mining industry in the country by 2030. — @ncubeleon.