The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
“MY vision is to transform Pan African Postal Union (PAPU) into a vehicle for postal transformation in Africa,” says Zimbabwe’s candidate for the continental organisation’s secretary-general post Mr Sifundo Chief Moyo. Victoria Falls is hosting the 10th Ordinary Session of the PAPU and initially, three candidates were vying for the post currently being held by Mr Gjibrine Younnous. The candidate from Mali pulled out yesterday, leaving Mr Moyo to contest Mr Sameh Solaiman of Egypt. Government last week met ambassadors from the African continent to brief them on the state of Zimbabwe’s preparedness to host the high-level regional conference and officially introduced Mr Moyo as the candidate. The elections will be held on Friday when President Mnangagwa is expected to officially open the weeklong conference being held at Kingdom Hotel. Other delegates are following virtually from their respective countries in adherence to Covid-19 protocols. On Thursday evening, there will be final announcement of candidates at a gala dinner. In an interview yesterday, Mr Moyo whose postal experience spans over 25 years, said he is more than ready to make Zimbabwe proud. He said numerous engagements had taken place both at the venue and before with delegates who are now aware of his capabilities through the contribution he has made over the years. “I am more than prepared as we go towards this election. Preparations didn’t start now or last year but when I started working in the post office sector 25 years ago. It is the work I have done over the years that speaks about who I am more than the campaign which is there to seek for support. “I never thought one day I would want to be a secretary-general but it is the culmination of what I have done in more than two decades. This is the homestretch now and since we came here, we have been, through the Ministry (of Information Communication Technologies, Postal and Courier Services), Permanent Secretary and Board chair, engaging delegates. I want PAPU to lead programmes like digitalisation of services and play its role as a chief advisor of Government, regulatory authorities and designated postal operators on postal matters.” He said his vision is for PAPU to champion, safeguard and preserve the interests of African continent to other regions. He said he wants to reorient its programmes to support African Union Agenda 2063, Africa Continental Free Trade Area, Sustainable Development Goals and other aspirations of the motherland. “PAPU should be in a position to get all this done through designated postal operators. Instead of people seeing technology as a threat to postal services, we should see it as an opportunity for transformation,” said Mr Moyo, a married father of three. The first announcement for his candidature was made in Burkina Faso in 2019 at a PAPU Administrative Council meeting and he has been actively participating at various fora angling himself for the position as an official candidate for Zimbabwe. He has also been using social media and has a Facebook page where his manifesto was being channeled to the continent. Mr Moyo’s professional history, as an experienced Pan African postal diplomat, international speaker on postal transformation, leader and strategist is hinged on his academic background as he holds a Masters Degree in Business Administration, BA Science Honours Degree in Economics, Advanced Diploma in Transport and Logistics, and certificates in Street Addressing and Management of Cities and Proficiency in Pension Scheme Trusteeship, among numerous other short courses. He is currently the postmaster-general of Zimpost and won an award for Zimpost for outstanding contribution to postal development as a quality of service champion. He is a member of some professional bodies and promises to uphold professional integrity and Pan African values. There are also other candidates vying for the assistant secretary-general post, the only other elective position in PAPU.-@ncubeleon