The Chronicle Stephen Mpofu, Perspective At no other time(s) since creation is the wide world in which we live known to have been reduced by disease to a virtual miniature village, as is the case today, with every nation reeling under the Covid-19 pandemic. In the circumstances, the ignorant/semi-literate bury their heads in the sand in hopes that the coronavirus which has left millions dropping to the ground dead, like fumigated pests, with millions more struggling for survival while the educated and knowledgeable are abated by their carnal stubbornness to throw away to the wind all measures to curb the spread of the pandemic, apparently describing these as of no consequence in their pursuits of joyful life and apparently saying to themselves: “whether the weather be bad, whether the weather be good, we shall weather the weather.” This last group of people can be said to wantonly thumb their noses at protocols from the World Health Organisation for their protection and the protection of others against the coronavirus in the same way that our forebears, Adam and Eve, defied God’s protocol which happened to be the Almighty’s prophecy. God told them they could eat all the fruits in the garden of Eden except those from the tree of knowledge in the centre of the garden; otherwise they would surely die. God’s word was a prophecy and people continue to die today. Surely it can be said with equanimity that the WHO protocols given to the people by their governments for their protection from the coronavirus are informed by prototypes of God’s prophesy to Adam and Eve that they would die if they defied His word about which fruits to eat from the Garden. Repeated surges of the deadly coronavirus in Zimbabwe and other countries today, with localised lockdowns introduced in bids to check the spread of the virus, can be put down to people burying their heads in the sand instead of adhering religiously to the directives to prevent the spread of the virus. The WHO protocols include wearing face masks, social distancing and washing one’s hands with water and soap. If followed to the letter these measures will not go wrong in preventing the coronavirus from spreading and infecting other people. On the contrary, their defiance has resulted in various parts of the country being put under localised lockdowns, with the reopening of schools previously scheduled for the day after tomorrow being postponed by two weeks for the protection of pupils while authorities review the situation further. Surely our people should make every effort to embrace the protocol guidelines to prevent the loss of more lives. For instance, the word in Amos 8:16 says “festivals and celebrations become sad” as is the case in Zimbabwe right now due to the coronavirus pandemic lockdown. The earth will shake (Amos 8:8) as world economies are badly shaken by the Covid-19 pandemic right now. God’s word says in Leviticus 14:4,5,46: “keep distance if you have symptoms, cover your mouth and avoid contact” something that many Zimbabweans are defying today and the police are deployed to ensure adherence to this and other protocols. Currently churches are also shut under lockdowns in efforts by authorities to protect congregants from infection by the coronavirus means that people cannot hear the word of God, for sinners to be converted to Christianity in preparation for judgment day which will see those who have received Jesus Christ as their Lord and Saviour and served Him, going to heaven while sinners go to hell. Christians should not totally succumb to the dictates of the coronavirus to the devil’s delight but must use every tool available to spread the word of God for the salvation of humanity at the end of this world. The tools in point here include mass communications media, such as newspapers, radio and television, the internet, books et cetera, especially when lockdowns such as we have prevent the holding of crusades where general members of the public can freely attend. Spreading the word of God in languages understood by everyone should help the public make informed decisions about heaven or hell in the afterlife. Those who hear and receive the word become insular to toxic social relations that are a barrier to their rebirth as Christians and children of God at our Creator’s delight and will therefore be prepared for the great indaba or judgment day with at present, and in light of the world coronavirus pandemic many people speculating that humanity is on our last stretch in this canal world and with devout Christians raring to welcome their Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ on His second return to close the last chapter of a world riddled with trials and tribulations with eternity on the wings of His chosen ones.