The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter RETAILERS have welcomed the tightening of Covid-19 national lockdown measures and implored business leaders and consumers to adhere to set protocols to ensure safety and prevent loss of life. On Tuesday, President Mnangagwa announced a strict level four lockdown in which business hours have been reduced to between 8am and 3.30pm. Custodial sentences will be imposed for fake Covid-19 certificate holders while intercity travel, except for production and distribution of food and medicine, has been banned. There will also be mandatory quarantine for deportees and those from countries with Alpha and Delta Covid-19. The restrictions, which took effect on Tuesday, will be in place for two weeks pending a review of the situation. President Mnangagwa has said the new regulations are designed to allow economic activity to continue as possible while containing the spread of the virus.
In a statement, Confederation of Zimbabwe Retailers (CRZ) president, Mr Denford Mutashu, said the latest measures will help curb further spread of Covid-19. “The Confederation of Zimbabwe Retailers (CZR) applauds President Mnangagwa for announcing level 4 Covid-19 restrictions in order to curb a surge in new cases and deaths,” he said. “CZR urges business and the general public to strictly adhere to the measures. Let us all remain vigilant and save lives and livelihoods. President Mnangagwa is on record saying it is better to save lives as the economy will be resuscitated in future. The country is in a state of war against the invisible enemy, the Covid-19 pandemic and it is our collective responsibility to stop the spread of this respiratory
disease. Together we can defeat Covid-19.” The CZR recently issued a statement imploring Government to implement a national lockdown saying it had noticed a general surge of Covid-19 cases in most parts of the country due to lack of physical distancing and disregard to wearing of masks. At that time the Government had announced localised lockdown measures in parts of the country to curb the spread of the deadly pandemic. The CZR had come under attack by the Tourism Business Council of Zimbabwe (TBCZ), which said a national lockdown would affect tourism recovery. – @ncubeleon 