The Chronicle Yvonne Ncube , Chronicle Reporter
Chronicle reporters yesterday dominated the Musasa Annual Media Monitoring (Southern Region) Awards (Mamma) when they scooped four awards in the competition meant to reward efforts by the media to curb gender-based violence (GBV) in Zimbabwe. The awards are jointly sponsored by Spotlight Media Monitoring and UNFPA. Michael Magoronga scooped the Print Reporter of the Year award for his story on Kwekwe junior councillors who eloped with gold panners. Mkhululi Ncube was the first runner up in the print media category for his story on a Plumtree family that shunned hospitalisation leading to the death of four members in six months. Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu was the second runner up for her story on how Covid-19 disrupted access to contraception leading to GBV. Gibson Mhaka was the overall electronic media winner for his story on the specialised support for People living with disabilities. In monitoring media portrayal of women, Mamma penalised participants for promoting pornography and violence against all persons, especially women and children, depicting women as helpless victims of violence and abuse, degrading persons especially in the area of entertainment and advertising, undermining their role and position in society and reinforcing gender oppression and stereotypes. It said the media should instead give equal voice to women and men in all areas of coverage. Musasa ex-director Mrs Precious Taru said journalists and media practitioners are key stakeholders in GBV response and should be acknowledged. “Today is an award ceremony to acknowledge journalists that have given the voice to the voiceless and survivors of violence that include both women and men,” said Mrs Taru. The Ministry of Women Affairs’ Bulawayo provincial development officer Mr Dingani Dlomo said violence against women has attracted world attention. “I have a few suggestions to promote awareness about the role of media in preventing GBV. First one is a collaborative approach between the Government, media and health officials that take into account the barriers and perspectives of the media. “Professionals and practitioners are needed to develop solutions that are sustainable and have a better uptake. The second proposal is to make GBV reporting a mandatory part of the training curriculum of journalists and also encourage television channels to host periodic talk shows with experts on GBV,” said Mr Dlomo. He said the media plays a pivotal role in shaping the thoughts and perspectives of society about women and children hence the need to monitor it. — @SeehYvonne.