The Chronicle Carlo Ancelotti has sealed a sensational return to Real Madrid, leaving his post as Everton manager after only one full season at Goodison Park. Ancelotti managed Real from 2013 to 2015, leading them to their 10th European Cup triumph against Atletico Madrid in Lisbon in 2014. Now the 61-year-old has taken over for a second spell after Zinedine Zidane’s own second tenure came to an end last week. Ancelotti quits Goodison Park after leading the Toffees to an underwhelming 10th place finish in the 2020-21 campaign. Spanish paper Marca reported broke the news earlier on Tuesday that Ancelotti is “the chosen one” for the Spanish giants and on the brink of a dramatic return to LaLiga. And hours later, the deal was done with wages no issue for Ancelotti on what has been a whirlwind day in both the Spanish capital and at Finch Farm, Everton’s training base. The search is now on at Everton for Ancelotti’s replacement. West Ham boss David Moyes, who managed the Toffees for 11 years, is in the picture to take the reins once again, alongside former Wolves manager Nuno Espirito Santo and ex-Bournemouth boss Eddie Howe. The Italian Ancelotti left Real six years ago on good terms with president Florentino Perez and the club’s hierarchy and the door was always open for a return. Everton finished 12th in 2019-20 after he succeeded Marco Silva before coming 10th in the campaign just finished. It was ultimately a disappointment with Everton in strong contention for European qualification for much of the season. He was contracted to Everton until 2024 but that relationship is now over early so Ancelotti can have another crack at the Real job. After Zidane exited last week following a season without silverware, Real drew up a shortlist of replacements that included Paris Saint-Germain boss Mauricio Pochettino, Antonio Conte and club legends Raul and Xabi Alonso. But the momentum behind a return for Ancelotti gathered strength over the weekend. His two-season spell as their manager between 2013 and 2015 saw him maintain a 75 per cent win ratio. As well as the Champions League, which saw them defeat Atletico Madrid 4-1 after extra time in the Lisbon final, Real also won the Copa del Rey in the same season. They added the European Super Cup and the Fifa Club World Cup the following campaign. On Monday, the outgoing Zidane took aim at club president Perez in a fiery goodbye letter. “I’m leaving but I’m not abandoning the ship and I’m not tired of coaching,” he wrote. – Mailonline