The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
LEGENDARY Afro-jazz musician, Jeys Marabini has urged local musicians not to be disheartened following the latest suspension of arts events due to the spike of Covid-19 cases countrywide. Instead, he has implored artistes to take this as an opportunity to continue exploring new avenues and working on releasing new music in order to remain relevant. He said now is the time for musicians to up their game. “When the music sector was officially reopened a few days ago, we were happy as we anticipated hosting live shows once again. Fans were also looking forward to seeing us in action, but unfortunately, the Covid-19 situation has reached another level, forcing the Government to once again suspend arts events. “As a musician, I want to urge my fellows not to be disheartened by this, but continue working on their various projects as people are in serious need of music now as it has the power to cheer them up and soothe their souls,” said Jeys Marabini. The power of music, Jeys Marabini said is clear for all to see, giving an example of the number of people who are seen walking around with earphones while some will be carrying speaker boxes or busting up music in their cars. It is for these reasons that Jeys feels artistes need to continue churning out music as the market is in great need of it. On his part, Jeys Marabini has been using the lockdown period to try out new things. Earlier this year, he switched things up when he sampled the reggae genre and produced a track, Jah Deliver Us that was an instant hit. Following the success of this track, not only locally but also regionally, he has decided to continue producing singles in that genre that he hopes will awe his old and new fans. “I’m working on my next reggae tracks as I want to keep people entertained and happy. These are stressful times and people could really do with good music to cheer them up. “As an artiste that’s been in the industry for over 35 years, we have gone through times of drought and bearer cheques, you name it all, but we’ve managed to stay afloat. This is my hope for other artistes, that they continue to find ways to reinvent themselves in order to remain relevant as this (pandemic) shall pass,” said Jeys Marabini. He added that this is also a good time for musicians to collaborate so that when the pandemic ends, people will be eager to see them perform live. Jeys Marabini said it is becoming more important for musicians to have other revenue generating projects as music alone has proven not enough to sustain their livelihoods. “The unfortunate thing is that as musicians, without shows we’ll be between a rock and a hard place. Members of bands especially will be greatly affected as they won’t be having anything to do at such a time. “This also shows that it’s high time that we, as musicians, have savings for the uncertain eras,” said Jeys Marabini. – @mthabisi_mthire