The Chronicle Showbiz Reporter
The National Arts Council of Zimbabwe (NACZ) has advised artistes to take note of the suspension of public performances in compliance with the latest Covid-19 measures. In a statement issued yesterday, NACZ said: “NACZ would like to advise stakeholders in the sector of the immediate suspension of arts public performances in compliance with the statement outlining renewed measures to curb surging Covid-19 cases in the country, issued by the Vice President of the Republic of Zimbabwe — Hon (Rtd) General Dr C G D N Chiwenga, who is also the Minister of Health & Child Care. “The suspension which runs from 14 June, 2021 until further notice, signals the deferment of events that appeal to the general public to attend for the consumption of cultural goods and services offered by the sector. All events which attract public gatherings are therefore suspended.” The council urged artistes to utilise digital alternatives to reach out to the general public. It however said artistes are still permitted to conduct their day-to-day business such as working on productions. “Day to day office work by artists for continued production and creation of new art shall align to the 8am to 6pm work routines as enunciated in the new Covid-19 containment regulations. NACZ therefore, encourages all the arts sector players to comply and give maximum support to the Government and national efforts to contain the Covid-19 third wave currently on the rise in our nation.” Zimbabwe recorded 596 new cases and 26 deaths last week and authorities believe the spike in new cases is a result of complacency in communities and at workplaces. “All gatherings except funerals are banned. These gatherings include, but not limited to weddings, church gatherings, music festivals and sports activities,” VP Chiwenga said. Under the new measures, restaurants are not allowed to sell food to sit-in customers, beer halls and nightclubs remain closed while bottle stores will operate from 10am to 4pm.”