The Chronicle Yvonne Ncube, Business Reporter
PINTAIL Trading Private Limited, trading as Wholesale Centre Liquor Hub and Groceries, has spent more than US$30 000 on expansion of the business targeting the Bulawayo market. On Monday the company opened a new branch in Mountain View area in Lobengula West under its Sai Mart brand. The business already runs two branches in the central business district (CBD) and the new branch has created about 30 jobs. The local franchise is owned by prominent businessman, Raji Modi, who is also the Deputy Minister of Industry and Commerce and Member of the House of Assembly for Bulawayo South constituency. The new shop has taken over premises that were previously occupied by Choppies Supermarket, which was vandalised during violent demonstrations in January 2019. In an interview Deputy Minister Modi, said their expansion drive was motivated by the desire to create employment opportunities for locals. “This shop was destroyed during the January 2019 demonstrations. Everything, not even a single door survived. So, it has been taken from ashes,” he said. “The owner of the shop and I worked together and the whole project cost US$30  000. We have created jobs for locals. We are looking for more space to expand the business and create more jobs,” he said. Deputy Minister Modi urged other business leaders to come on board and contribute to creating employment for the city’s residents.
Sai Mart Stores and Liquor Hub general manager, Mr Stanford Mazura, said the new outlet will ensure all measures are taken to guarantee customers’ safety given the threat of the Covid-19 pandemic. “We will strive to strictly adhere to the Covid-19 health protocols to minimise the customers’ exposure to the pandemic,” said Mr Mazura. During official opening the elderly people and first customers received mealie-meal donations and PPE. Mrs Terresa Nyambuya (70) expressed joy over the opening of the new shop. “I’m a vendor and going to town now and again can be straining at my age. I’m glad that I will be able to buy my groceries locally. I also want to thank management for donating mealie-meal to us, the elderly,” she said.