The Chronicle Michelle Nyanzira, Chronicle Reporter
YOUNG women farmers countrywide have applauded the initiative by 4-H Zimbabwe of introducing the Intwasa/Pfumvudza awards saying it gave them the zeal to play a part in boosting the country’s food security. The country’s agriculture sector was highly boosted for the 2020 and 2021 farming season as bumper harvests were recorded in all districts mostly due to the conservation farming technique commonly known as Intwasa/Pfumvudza. On realising the high yields obtained by farmers, local companies partnered to award farmers, particularly young women who have for years been marginalised in the industry’s value chain. This was done by awarding the farmers certificates of excellence for their outstanding work in farming activities at the second edition of the awards ceremony held in Hurungwe West last Saturday. Two months ago, the inaugural awards ceremony was held at Chirumanzu South where 30 farmers were awarded in the district for being the outstanding farmers under Intwasa/Pfumvudza. The ceremony was attended by Chirumanzu Zibagwe Member of Parliament Prosper Machando. The third edition of the awards is set to be held at Bulilima District in Matabeleland South on a date to be announced. The awards, a brainchild of 4-H Zimbabwe in partnership with SeedCo, Deutsch Connect, Mhuri Farming, Syngenta, and Empower Bank are part of the ongoing youth mentorship programmes launched last year that seek to support the youth in all sectors of the economy for them to improve and gain exposure. The awards are all held under the theme ‘‘Musha Mukadzi Murimi,’’ which seeks to promote gender equality through agriculture. It also aims at uplifting and encouraging female farmers from different provinces in the country. Speaking at the event in Hurungwe West last Saturday, Deputy Minister for Women’s Affairs, Community, Small and Medium Enterprise Development Jennifer Mhlanga said women need thorough training in order to be productive. “The awards are of necessity and are aimed at boosting the confidence of young female farmers to take up the profession formerly linked to men and do wonders. “The awards will also allow these young farmers to produce for sustenance and excess for sale to enable a healthy living, economic independence and sustainability,” she said. Dep Minister Mhlanga said if female farmers do not have knowledge on how to manage their finances, they will not be productive, that is why a women’s bank is about to be launched, to assist female entrepreneurs. Along with certificates, the young farmers were awarded fertilisers, hoes, seeds, t-shirts and hats. “This drive is to address the incapacitation of young female farmers in rural Zimbabwe, climate change effects and mitigation, economic and human rights challenges faced by the rural young female farmers in pursuing food security and livelihoods in Zimbabwe,” she said. One of the beneficiaries Ms Rutendo Musiyiwa said being appreciated for what they do in the farming sector is of paramount importance as it gives the zeal to work harder. “We hope being capacitated will also go a long way in boosting the country’s food security,” she said. Another beneficiary, Ms Tendai Chirau said gone are the days that women should only focus on household issues and the fact that Intwasa/Pfumvudza is largely for boosting food securities at homes shows that women should play a pivotal role in making it a success. “The awards could not have come at a better time as the Government is moving in to mechanise the programme after recording successful outputs,” said Ms Chirau. — @michieroxy