The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
THREE of the four Chibuku Super Cup groups will break for a week after reaching the halfway mark in what has been an exciting restart to local football after a 14-month absence. Only Harare-based clubs that form Group A will be in action this weekend, playing their fifth matches to reach the halfway stage of the round robin tournament. Group A has six clubs, Dynamos, Caps United, Harare City, ZPC Kariba, Herentals and Yadah, while Group B, C and D all have four teams each. Dynamos drew 1-1 with Caps United on Sunday and top Group A with eight points from four outings. DeMbare have won two games, 4-0 against Yadah and 1-0 over ZPC Kariba, and drawn 0-0 with Herentals. They face Harare City in their last first-round match this weekend. The Harare pool is a tightly contested, with just three points separating Dynamos and fourth-placed ZPC Kariba. Caps United and Harare City are tied on six points, leaving the group wide open. Herentals and Yadah are both tied on two points. The top two teams in each group will proceed to the quarter-finals, with Group A winners set to face the runners-up in Group C, which is currently led by Cranborne Bullets on five points, followed by Black Rhinos and Tenax on four points, while Manica Diamonds are on three points. In Group B, Chicken Inn are on seven points with Highlanders, but top the log with a superior goal difference, while Bulawayo City and Bulawayo Chiefs have a point apiece. Group D leaders Ngezi Platinum Stars FC are the only side with a 100 percent record at the halfway stage of the group games. Ngezi coach Rodwell Dhlakama shocked FC Platinum at Mandava Stadium, coming from a goal down to beat the reigning league champions 2-1. Despite his side earning the favourites’ tag due to their performances, Dhlakama says they’re still on a building phase. “It’s good that we’re doing well and showing great character after a long layoff. All this is because of the hard work we’re putting in as we continue building our team. We’ve got a great group of players that have shown the desire to fight till the last whistle. We have experienced players leading the fight and motivating the youngsters,” said Dhlakama. Under Dhlakama, former Warriors’ captain Denver Mukamba has rediscovered his yesteryear form, while ex-Highlanders and ZPC Kariba midfielder Nigel Makumbe has ably provided cover for Mukamba. Goalkeeper Nelson Chadya, defenders Polite Moyo and Qadr Amini, as well as midfielders Gerald Takwara, Marvellous Mukumba and Valentine Kadonzvo have been on top of their game. FC Platinum are three points behind Ngezi, with Triangle and Whawha struggling with one point each. “We can’t afford to relax, we have to keep improving and with the second legs coming, every side would have corrected their mistakes so, it’s still game on,” said Dhlakama. In 2019, Ngezi controversially lost 0-1 to Highlanders in the Chibuku Super Cup final at Barbourfields Stadium after Prince Dube scored a hotly contested goal. Dube’s well struck shot hit under the crossbar and Ngezi players and officials disputed that it crossed the line.— @ZililoR