The Chronicle Mehluli Sibanda, Senior Sports Reporter
THE Zimbabwe senior national XVs rugby team final squad to take part in the Rugby Africa Cup Pool D in Tunisia next month has been announced. Scrumhalf Hilton Mudariki will lead the Sables in Tunisia where they will play against Burkina Faso and Tunisia in matches that serve as a pathway for the France 2023 Rugby World Cup qualification. Mudariki is one of the experienced players in the Sables’ squad after making his debut in the national team against Namibia in 2013.
Other seasoned players in the squad are Royal Mwale, Riaan O’Neill, Biselele Tshamala, David Makamba, Shayne Makombe and Matthew Mandioma. New boys like Doug Juszczyk and Brandon Mudzekenyedzi will get to represent Zimbabwe for the first time in an international competition. Zimbabwe managed to play two international friendly matches against Zambia at Harare Sports Club early this month. The team that has been in camp since May 16, resumed training on Wednesday at Old Georgians Sports Club after being given the green light to continue fine tuning their preparations by the Sports and Recreation Commission on Tuesday and leaves for Tunisia this evening. The Sables were supposed to travel to Portugal to play a game against the Portuguese on July 3, but will now travel directly to the North African country after being denied visas to enter the European nation. In Tunisia, the Sables will hold a two-week training camp before they take on Burkina Faso on July 13 and Tunisia four days later. All Pool D matches will be played at Stade Mustapha Ben Jannet in Monastir, a city 162km from the Tunisian capital Tunis. If Zimbabwe win Pool D, they will most likely meet Madagascar in the quarter-finals and then Namibia in the last four in July next year. The winner of the Rugby Africa Cup will secure the continent’s ticket to the Rugby World Cup, while the runners-up also stand a chance of heading to France via the Repechage. Before the Sables leave for Tunisia, a new sponsor of the team will be unveiled today. Early this month, Nedbank Zimbabwe unveiled a US$120 000 for the Sables for the team’s welfare and day to expenses
Sables squad Hilton Mudariki (captain), Tonderai Chiwambutsa, Blithe Mavesere, Sean Beevor, Godfrey Muzanargwo, Royal Mwale, Cleopas Kundiona, Aiden Burnett, Tyran Fagan, Riaan O’Neill, Martin Mangongo, Deanne Makoni, Brandon Mudzekenyedzi, Shingirai Katsvere, Matthew McNab, Takudzwa Chieza, Doug Juszczyk, Bornwell Gwinji, David Makamba, Shayne Makombe, Matthew Mandioma, Dudlee White-Sharpley, Keith Chiwara, Biselele Tshamala, Sebastian Roche, Brendon Mandivenga Coach: Brendan Dawson
Assistant coach: Liam Middleton
Physiotherapist: Alice Randall
Team manager: Jason Maritz
— @Mdawini_29