The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
DOCTORS and hospital staff at Kwekwe General Hospital who were left homeless after fire gutted their residence on Monday morning continue to receive assistance from well-wishers. Local businessmen Mr Tobias Kadenhe and Energy ‘Dhala’ Ncube have availed their houses for use by the doctors. Kadenhe also donated US$200 while Ncube, a Kwekwe Central legislator aspirant (Zanu-PF), donated groceries, clothing, blankets and US$300 for the staffers. Yesterday, another businessman, who is also a medical practitioner, availed his Pamumvuri Lodge to accommodate some of the doctors and purchased groceries for his colleagues. Companies continue to come in with donations with Haggie Rand donating blankets. Speaking after receiving a donation from the wire making company, medical superintendent Dr Patricia Mapanda expressed gratitude to the Kwekwe community. “The gesture by the Kwekwe community is overwhelming and I want to thank those who are seeing it fit to assist us in this time of need. We are so grateful to everyone who is assisting us,” she said. Dr Mapanda said more accommodation was needed as there were some staffers who were still sheltered at the hospital wards. “We are still looking for accommodation for our administrator and another doctor who is single. “The Administrator managed to salvage his furniture since he stayed in the outside room but the other doctor who had just moved in had all his property destroyed,” said Dr Mapanda. She said the affected staffers had been given days off adding arrangements had been made for some nursing staff who were also affected to either transfer or to operate from home. Giving an update on the cause of fire, Dr Mapanda said, investigations were still underway. “We are yet to ascertain the cause of the fire but we strongly suspect it was an electrical fault. “Authorities from Zesa, fire brigade and other relevant authorities are still carrying out investigations on the cause of the fire and we will be able to ascertain the cause of fire,” she said. Dr Mpanda said the hostels were beyond repair. 