The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Chronicle Reporter
RENOWNED historian Mr Pathisa Nyathi and Prince Zwidekalanga Khumalo have welcomed the visit by President Mnangagwa saying it shows that he has keen interest in preserving the history, heritage and culture of Bulawayo and Zimbabwe in general. Last week, the President visited various heritage sites around the city such as the Inxwala grounds, The Hanging Tree, Joshua Nkomo statue, St Mary’s Cathedral Basilica, Joshua Nkomo Museum and the Natural History Museum. During the tour of Inxwala grounds, the Hanging Tree and the Joshua Nkomo statue, Mr Nyathi explained the significance and history of the sites to President Mnangagwa and the Vice President General (Rtd) Dr Constantino Chiwenga and cabinet ministers. After the tour and during the Bulawayo Arts Festival’s conference, President Mnangagwa commended the sterling work done by Mr Nyathi who has written extensively about Zimbabwe’s history and culture. He said the stories of Father Zimbabwe, the late Vice President Joshua Nkomo, King Mzilikazi, King Lobengula, Queen Lozikeyi, Umlugulu, Ginyamatshe, Mbuya Nehanda and Mukwati must be popularised. “This will go a long way in consolidating unity, peace and social cohesion as fundamental ingredients for nation building. I thus exhort stakeholders in the education and media fraternity as well as communities to continue playing their part in the rewriting of the correct history and bequeathing it to future generations. I commend Pathisa Nyathi for the work he has done. It will remain very useful for generations to come,” said the President. Mr Nyathi said being recognised was more fulfilling than any monetary reward. “It is very good to hear that someone at such a high office is in touch with what is happening at the grassroot level. It’s humbling that the work that I am doing is visible. This recognition is more rewarding than money,” said Mr Nyathi. “President Mnangagwa and Vice President Chiwenga together with Cabinet ministers spent the whole day not teaching people about politics but listening to our stories about history, culture and heritage. This is welcome,” said Mr Nyathi. He said he built Amagugu International Heritage Centre and wrote books on folktales to preserve history and culture for future generations. Mr Peter Zwidekalanga Khumalo, spokesperson and representative of the Khumalo House who was among those that toured the Inxwala grounds and Hanging Tree, said as a family they welcome the President’s visit and keen interest in preserving the history and heritage of Bulawayo. “The Khumalos are happy that the President has a keen interest in the history, heritage and culture of Bulawayo. This shows commitment in keeping our history as a nation. Also, I urge the Government to come up with an African city policy which is in line with keeping our heritage. There have to be structural changes within the city of Bulawayo in line with the emotions and expectations of the citizens and Zimbabweans in general,” said Prince Zwide.