The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
RHUMBA sensation Madlela Skhobokhobo and maskandi musician Indlamuva have ventured into the poultry business as a fallback plan. The duo are anticipating being the biggest chicken suppliers in Bulawayo after securing a place to operate at Kelvin Industrial sites through their chicken business named Dlelas Chickens Indlamuva Yinkosi. The move is a way of augmenting their income from music as the arts sector has for the past year, been closed with live shows recently being banned again due to the rise in Covid-19 cases countrywide. The deepening liquidity crunch has forced some artistes to think outside the box and venture into other income-generating projects like farming. Artistes such as Tedius Matsito, Alick Macheso, Sulumani Chimbetu, Peter Moyo, Mathias Mhere and Bethen Pasinawako-Ngolomi are among those who have turned to farming. Madlela who earlier this year announced that he had ventured into cross-border trading said he will continue to diversify in order to be able to fend for his family. “I’ll continue to diversify from the arts sector as a way of making a living. So far, I’ve managed to open Dlelas Delivery, Dlelas Money, Dlelas Transport and now, Dlelas Chickens Indlamuva Yinkosi, a partnership with Indlamuva. “We’re targeting to have over 1 000 birds in the coming months after having started with our first batch of 200. The lockdown has taught us that in order to survive, there’s a need to diversify,” said Madlela whose acting career is also flourishing. Indlamuva said he is hopeful that the business will flourish as they conducted a lot of research before venturing into it. “We looked at the challenges that we’re facing as artistes and came up with a plan to open a poultry business. We were inspired by companies like Hamara who are successful in the chicken business. “As a company, we’re hoping to grow the business with the project’s first batch set to be ready for sale next month,” said Indlamuva. — @mthabisi_mthire.