The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
THE Covid-19 pandemic has tested many people’s faith in the Lord with up-and-coming gospel artiste BK seeing this as an opportunity to reach out to people through music and hopefully find his desired audience. Born Bright Kevin Rondozai, the 20-year-old musician grew up in Mutare before relocating to Bulawayo in 2010. He was introduced to music professionally in 2016. BK said his focus is on bringing his peers closer to God through a genre that many youngsters have overlooked. “My vision is to bring light to young people on the power of Christ. As a future generation, it’s important for us to know God, something I’m lobbying for with my music. So far, I’ve released two albums – By my side (2018) and Uplifting the Talent which was dropped last year with the assistance of Dr Albert Nyathi,” said BK. His 2018 album has songs, By my side, Ngixolele, Amanda Bright K featuring King Adiza, Be with you, Ngibonga wena, Praise God featuring Shaddy, Ngiyamthanda featuring King Adiza and Death (spoken word poem). Uplifting the Talent has songs – Hossana, Jehovah, Thank you Lord, Masidumise, Overdose featuring King Adiza, We are one (poem ft Dr Albert Nyathi), 2000 the 21st Century (2k) poem, I remember (poem) and Mama featuring Kid Silobela. The artiste who used to specialise in karate said he ventured into music after he felt the need to share the word of God through motivational words. “Before I ventured into music, I did professional karate with the Japan Shotokan Karate Association (JSKA) under Sensei Taurai Majaya. I then switched the martial arts for music and I’m glad to say I’m now ready to storm the national scene with my music,” he said. To introduce himself to new audiences, BK who is inspired by Dr Zamar and Frank Edwards said he is working on a single titled Rejoice that will be launched on Khulumani FM on Monday. After this, he hopes to collaborate with fast-rising rapper, Msiz’Kay and Juntal, the Rumba King. -@mthabisi_mthire.