The Chronicle Mehluli Sibanda in Francistown, Botswana
Botswana 0-1 Zimbabwe ZIMBABWE took great strides towards qualification for next year’s Africa Cup of Nations when Perfect Chikwende’s first-half header gave the Warriors three points in a Group H fixture at the Obed Itani Chilume Stadium where kick-off was delayed by over half an hour as they awaited Warriors’ Covid-19 results. The win saw second-placed Zimbabwe take their points tally to eight. Algeria, who have already qualified for the Afcon and Zambia faced off last night and any result that is not a win for Chipolopolo in Lusaka means Zimbabwe have booked a ticket to Cameroon. Chikwende from Tanzania’s Simba Sports Club was given his Warriors’ debut and he headed in a rebound from Knowledge Musona’s free kick in the 14th minute Botswana goalkeeper Kabelo Dambe parried the ball into his path. Zimbabwe were able to withstand a barrage of attacks from the Zebras throughout the match to walk away with the precious three points. The match was delayed because coronavirus polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test results for the Zimbabweans were still to be availed. An update provided by the Botswana Football Association sought to shift blame to the Zimbabweans, who they said refused to be tested for Covid-19 when they landed in Francistown late on Wednesday from Johannesburg, South Africa. The tests for the Zimbabwean delegation were conducted at the team’s hotel yesterday morning. Spain-based goalkeeper Martin Mapisa was said to have inconclusive test results and was asked to step aside. “Zimbabwe, who only arrived in Botswana last night ahead of the anticipated clash, had reportedly refused to test last night (Wednesday). This was confirmed by the Botswana Football Association (BFA) acting CEO Thabiso Kebotsamang,” read part of the BFA’s statement. Teams
Botswana: K Dambe, M Gaolaolwe, S Mathumo, T Ditlhokwe, G Gaogangwe, K Kebaikanye, T Kgamanyane, O Makganyatai, F Setsile, T Molebatsi (Gadibolae 63 mins) Zimbabwe: T Shumba, G Chimwemwe, O Bhasera, T Hadebe, J Dzingai, T Kamusoko, O Karuru, P Chikwende (Rusike 88 mins), K Musona (E Rusike 89 mins), T Dzvukamanja (Mudimu 90+2 mins), K Mahachi Ncube (88 mins)