The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent THE body of a teacher in Silobela was found hanging from a tree in a suspected murder case. Mtandazo Moyo (52), of Simana Village under Chief Malisa, a teacher at Simana Primary School was found hanging from a tree in the early hours of February 27, a day after he had a misunderstanding with a fellow villager. Silobela legislator, Mthokozisi Manoki Mpofu said the suspect, Thobekani Bhebhe has since been picked up by police for questioning. “The body was found hanging from a tree branch behind the school where he stayed and I think the suspect wanted it to look like a suicide. But it’s unfortunate the body had injuries all over and it shows he was attacked before he was hung,” said the legislator. Midlands Police Spokesperson, Inspector Emmanuel Mahoko also confirmed the incident. “Police in Kwekwe are investigating a case of murder where a man died after being severely attacked with an axe by another villager after a misunderstanding,” he said. On the fateful day, according to police around 11pm, Moyo had a misunderstanding with Bhebhe of Nzwananzi Area in Silobela. “Bhebhe broke Moyo’s right hand and bruised his legs. The victim sought refuge at a nearby homestead in the same village where he received first aid,” said Inspector Mahoko. Bhebhe, police said, pursued Moyo and found him at the homestead and threatened to kill him. Fearing for his life, Moyo ran away into the darkness and he did not return to his home. The following day, around 1pm, a passerby found Moyo’s body hanging from a tree branch behind Simana Primary School. The matter was reported at ZRP Silobela and they attended the scene and took Bhebhe into custody. Moyo’s body taken for post-mortem to ascertain the cause of death. Inspector Mahoko urged members of the public to solve issues amicably. “We are appealing to members of the public to solve disputes peacefully. Dialogue could have ended this dispute peacefully and unnecessary loss of life could have been avoided,” said Inspector Mahoko.