The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
HISTORY beckons for the Zimbabwe national cricket team when they square off against Afghanistan in the second Test match at the Sheikh Zayed Cricket Stadium in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, today. The last time Zimbabwe managed to clean sweep a Test series was when they beat Bangladesh 2-0 in 2001. Their last Test series victory was also against Bangladesh in 2004 when they snatched the first Test in Harare and drew the second match at Queens Sports Club. Zimbabwe also beat the Tigers in a once-off Test match in 2011. If Zimbabwe beat Afghanistan in the second match, it will be the country’s first Test series triumph against a team other than Bangladesh in 23 years. Zimbabwe beat Pakistan 1–0 in a three-match series in December 1998. The Chevrons put up a brilliant performance in the first Test to beat Afghanistan by a massive 10-wickets inside two days last week and will be hoping to build on that performance to bag a historic series win. The bowlers carried the day for Zimbabwe, with the pace trio of Blessing Muzarabani, Victor Nyauchi and Donald Tiripano in top form. Muzarabani picked up six wickets, with best figures of 4/48, while Nyauchi also claimed six wickets and retained figures of 3/30. Zimbabwe bowling coach Douglas Hondo said he expects an improved performance from Afghanistan in the second match. “We expect the opposition to have done a bit more homework than us so we need to step it up on our preparations; how we are going to end up overcoming whatever challenges they bring for the second Test so we are preparing for all eventualities,’’ Hondo said. Afghanistan could welcome back key spinner Rashid Khan for the second Test. Khan missed the first match due to a finger injury. The match will be live on ZBC TV as well as RTA (Afghanistan), Fancode (India), eCriclife (UAE), Geo Super/PTV (Pakistan), Freesports (UK-Europe), Rabbithole YouTube Channel (Rest of the World). Zimbabwe Squad
Sean Williams (captain), Ryan Burl, Sikandar Raza Butt, Regis Chakabva, Kevin Kasuza, Wesley Madhevere, Wellington Masakadza, Prince Masvaure, Brandon Mavuta, Tarisai Musakanda, Richmond Mutumbami, Blessing Muzarabani, Richard Ngarava, Victor Nyauchi, Donald Tiripano