The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
Songbird, Sikhululekile “Skhu” Mpofu has resurfaced with a sizzling amapiano track titled Dakona that was inspired by a comment from a fan on Facebook. Skhu, one of the pioneers of the Urban Grooves, rose to fame through the song Hamba Nobani that featured her brother, Mbekezeli “PoZee” Mpofu. Since then she has been in and out of music with her last release being a track called Mama Wami in 2019 that was produced by the late Cal Vin. She is back again with Dakona which features DJ Holy being taken off her forthcoming album titled Rebirth. The single was released last week and is now available on all digital platforms. Skhu said the song was inspired by a fan on Facebook who was admiring her and proposed to meet her mother.
“When I was going through my Facebook inbox, I found a message from a man saying ‘Hie Skhu, ndoda kuona mai vako (I want to meet your mum)’, and I was like ‘excuse me’ to him. He was like ‘I’ve been viewing your profile pictures and all and this means that your mother is also good looking like you.” “It was a nice compliment though I thought he was rude and the comment was a bit off. “But after thinking about it, I then realised that he was complimenting my mother and I,” said Skhu. Fascinated by the messages, Skhu said she told her manager, DJ Holy about the comments and he suggested that the incident be turned into a song. “My manager suggested that we work on a song about this experience and I agreed. We settled for an Amapiano sound as that’s the in thing. “Basically, that’s how this song came about — that’s how we, as artistes come up with our music, we sing about our experiences,” explained Skhu. She said she opted for the Amapiano beat as she wanted the song to be appealing. “I decided to give the song an Amapiano beat so that people listen to it. As an artiste, you have to go with what’s trending at the time. “I’m targeting the youth and what we call Ama2000 who listen to this type of music.” The title track, Skhu said, came from the words ndoda kukuona. “I got this name from ndoda kukuona, what that guy was saying. So when singing, it’s simpler to say dakona hence the naming of the song,” Skhu said.