The Chronicle Nelias Shiri, Chronicle Reporter
LEADERS of apostolic sects have urged members to accept Covid-19 vaccination that is ongoing across the country. Traditionally, most apostolic sects shun vaccination programmes because of their religious beliefs. Bulawayo-based Prophet Mutumwa, the leader of Johanne Masowe eChishanu encouraged his colleagues to ensure that their followers embrace Government programmes including Covid-19 vaccination. “It’s our responsibility as church leaders to act in a responsible manner so I urge apostolic sect members across the country to accept the Covid-19 vaccinations in order to save lives,” he said. He said Covid-19 is real and people should be inoculated to curb the spread of the pandemic. The prophet also pleaded with the public to follow containment rules and regulations being implemented by Government. “The coronavirus pandemic is real and people are losing their lives regardless of one’s religious belief so it’s important to encourage our members to get vaccinated,” said Prophet Mutumwa. Speaking in a telephone interview a Johanne Marange leader from Zvishavane Prophet Nyasha Tshuma said members of apostolic sects should embrace the Covid-19 vaccination programme. Prophet Tshuma said modern medicine saved lives because it is God who empowered scientists to discover it. “Yes, we have our own religions with diverse beliefs but as for this pandemic, members of the apostolic sects should be vaccinated and throw away false speculations about the side effects and efficacy of the medicines,” said Prophet Tshuma. He said some of his followers from the health sector have since received their second jabs as per Government’s staggered phases to curb the virus. Mpilo Central Hospital Acting CEO Professor Solwayo Ngwenya said religious beliefs pose a threat to the entire nation if some refuse to be vaccinated. He said Government should engage apostolic sects to save lives. “If some religious groups refuse the vaccines it means we are not going to defeat the virus so I urge the national authorities to engage them on a serious note because they are not only going to die but they will die with us,” said Dr Ngwenya. The Zimbabwe Human Rights Association (ZimRights) has launched a social media campaign to conscientise people on their right to access the Covid-19 vaccine. ZimRights said vaccination was a human right protected under the right to health. “Access to a vaccine is a human right that is protected internationally and locally under the right to health and by extension the right to life,” ZimRights said in a statement yesterday. — @waydenaido.