The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
BULAWAYO production houses –Heart FX Studios, Pishavilla Communications and Dropout Films have collaborated for a series film project titled Soul mate. The shooting of the 10-episode series is set to start this month at locations in Bulawayo. The lead cast will have Braydan Heart as Phumza, Randall Ncube as Locracia, Perfect Nkiwane as Owen, Mayenzeke Mpofu as Chris and multi-award winning actress Qeqeshiwe Mntambo as Thandi. Commenting on the production, executive producer Braydan said it is a love story that is complex and yet enticing to watch where two soul mates find themselves talking intimately about their love story and how they ended up becoming soul mates. “Phumza and Locracia will take audiences on a journey informing them about how they ended up as soul mates. They narrate their stories in two different years and viewers will get to see two different worlds linking up in unbelievable ways. Phumza is from the ghetto while Locracia is a suburban girl,” he said. He said they are now concluding the pre-production stage although the ongoing lockdown is proving to be a major stumbling block. “Due to the lockdown, most of our lead cast and crew is locked up at their homes and we still need supporting roles so that we can start the principal photography of the pilot episode. “Auditions for supporting roles will now have to take place online with those interested being required to send short video clips of them performing a monologue to our WhatsApp platform. “For the pilot episode, we already have our lead cast thus we need about five supporting roles filled. For the rest of the season, we’ll be auditioning characters as we progress with the production,” said Braydan. Braydan is proving to be a force to reckon with in the local film industry as he is coming up with initiatives that are effortlessly becoming game-changers like his Being Braydan reality show that he launched some years ago. He is now preparing to premiere Season 2 of the show with a captivating promo having been released a few days ago. – @mthabisi_mthire