The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
THIRTEEN pupils at Alan Redfern junior school who teamed up to record their debut single after completing their Grade 7 exams last year are not slowing down as they have collaborated with the most sought-after award-winning artistes, Mzoe 7 and Skaiva on another single. Calling themselves the Skool Kidz, the pupils from Plumtree have completed working on the track titled Dlala that is being produced by Skaiva at his studios in Bulawayo. It is due to be released tomorrow on platforms that include Spotify, iTunez, Deezer. The group is made up of Alicia Sibanda, Nigel Khumalo, Phakamani Khumalo, Whitney Dumani, Christine Tshuma, Tatiana Mpofu, Thandekile Ndlovu, Andile Tshuma, Takudzwa Mnikwa, Hendry Ndlovu, Tanyani Mudau, Thandeka Nyathi and Dimpho Maseko. The kids are working closely with Plumtree-based promoter, Handsome Sibanda of Toundtainment Events and if their determination continues, they may just emerge as the country’s next big thing if their debut single, Hay’bo which was a fair production is anything to go by. Sibanda said they are appealing for sponsors to jump on board in the production of the visuals of the forthcoming song which he said is going to be a banger. “After the success of their first song titled Hay’bo, the Skool Kidz recorded a song with award-winning artiste, Mzoe 7. They’re very determined and we wish to shoot a music video for the song. The budget is US$400 and we’re appealing for people to help these young ones and make their dreams come true,” said Sibanda. Commenting on the collaboration, Mzoe 7 said: “The Skool Kidz are very talented young creatives who’re fun to work with as they brought the best out of me. “It was a pleasure working with them and my big brother, Skaiva. This is a vibrant song that’ll appeal to everyone and I can’t wait for people to hear it.” Skaiva added, “This is a club banger and dope song that the public should watch out for as everyone who was part of the project gave it their all.”- @mthabisi_mthire.