The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
THE inaugural Loziba Festival that is meant to uplift young female artistes in Bulawayo is set to be held online, starting next Monday. Named after Queen Loziba, senior queen and King Mzilikazi’s wife in the Ndebele Kingdom, the festival will be held under the theme: “Loziba in Local Governance” in line with its objective of creating widespread acceptance and support for young women’s art. The festival, the first of its kind in the city, was established by a committee of female artistes last year who came together after seeing the need to support each other in order to rise in the male-dominated field. They partnered with Youth For Innovation Trust (YIT) to come up with a concept that would honour the life of Queen Loziba while embracing the Ndebele culture and giving female artistes a breakthrough. Due to the Covid-19 pandemic that hit the country last year, the fete was postponed. This year, it must go on and it has adapted the new normal though other events might be held physically, if the arts sector fully reopens. What better time to launch the festival than now when the world is commemorating Women’s Month? YIT managing director, Thando Gwinji said they have lined up various programmes throughout the month with finer details to be released soon. “The festival will this year have quite a number of activities sprinkled across Women’s Month. The first activity will be held virtually on March 8 and it will be a fashion exhibition where local designers will be showcasing shoes. The exhibition will come up with a conversation dubbed ‘Walking the talk in ensuring gender responsive public spaces’,” she said. Gwinji said the discussion panel will include Bulawayo Metropolitan Proportional Representative Honourable Jasmine Toffa, YIELD information officer Sindiso Dlamini, Pumula Councillor Sikhululekile Moyo and songstress La Dee. “Those performing at the music festival include Aejay August, Noluntu J, Luchi Shikki, Sweet Mobby and Helen among others. We’ll also be producing a short-film starring Noma Q and Nokuthaba Neshiri. The film was produced by Tariro Gurure. We’re also looking forward to having poetry and humour from Rachel Voko, Chichi and many others,” said Gwinji. -@mthabisi_mthire.