The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
Charles Mdolomba Ndebele of Ndolwane Super Sounds Amangwe production has rallied Rhumba fans to support his former partner, Martin “The Big Boss” Sibanda as he prepares to launch his album this month. The album titled Uyavuma is due to be released tomorrow with the launch pencilled for March 27. Writing on his Facebook page, Ndebele while thanking rhumba fans for their support, urged them to buy copies of the original CD. “We thank you, our fans for supporting us in music. Without you, we’re nothing. I invite you all to support Martin ‘The Big Boss’ new album which is coming out on Friday. Let’s buy original music and stop piracy. “If you buy pirated music, know that you’re a destroyer and not a true fan,” wrote Ndebele while assuring fans that he will be among those who buy the album upon its release. He went on to hail Martin for keeping the name of their former band, Ndolwane Super Sounds, alive by continuing to produce quality music. Responding to his post, fans praised Ndebele for supporting his former colleague saying it was a good gesture needed for development of rhumba music. “You have a good heart sir. May all musicians learn from you as you’ve shown unity. May God keep you and fulfil your plans,” wrote one Doubt Gomba Dawu. Another fan, Mthunga Dube commented: “Thank you for your wonderful words Mdolomba and for supporting your brother. May the journey continue.” Other fans took time to call for the two to reunite or feature each other on their albums. “Is it not possible for you and Martin to feature each other even on one song? It’ll be good to see this happening,” wrote Paul Masuku. “May you please reconcile and give us even a single like you did on the song Ndanyala where you shared vocals?” The two have not had the best relationship after their split, but in recent years, the animosity seems to be thawing as they have appeared on stage together during shows. This has given fans some hope that one day, the two may reunite for a collaboration. — @themkhust