The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
Award winning songstress Novuyo Seagirl has teamed up with South Africa-based Afro pop musician La Dee in a song Imbokodo described as an expression of modern-day struggles of women and a celebration of their success. The music video of the song directed by Rasquesity Keaitse will be released on Tuesday on Novuyo Seagirl’s YouTube channel. The dance song will be available on all digital platforms. Novuyo Seagirl said the song was a celebration of women. “The song Imbokodo is an expression of modern-day struggles of women and a celebration of their successes. Women go through a lot in their daily routines and very few of their victories are celebrated,” said Novuyo Seagirl. She said this was part of her efforts to provide socially conscious music to society. “A lot is being done around women’s empowerment and I believe artistes also need to play their part in providing socially conscious music. Imbokodo being dropped on women’s month, March, has its own significance on how we as artistes are joining the world to make meaningful change in society. In line with this year’s theme of the international women’s month, we as artistes are also challenging stereotypes and usher in a culture of celebrating women’s successes,” said Novuyo Seagirl. She said it was a joy working with La Dee. “Working with La Dee was such a pleasure, she’s a vibe, totally humble and down to earth. I think what also made it easy is that we’ve been friends for a while now and our bubbly spirits connected to come up with this baby. We spent all night working on this song and even created a dance routine the very same night, which you will see on the video,” said Novuyo Seagirl. She added that it was befitting to work with a woman on this song. “It was totally fun, exciting and made sense working with her on a women’s empowerment track since we are both also part of the Loziba Movement which empowers young women in art. I must say I’m blessed to have her not only as a friend but a sister in art as well. And Lance Hebron being the producer for this once again, the studio was just on fire. That oneness among the three of us is what gave such an outcome,” said Novuyo Seagirl.