The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya Beitbridge Bureau GOVERNMENT has released $2,3 billion for the implementation of devolution projects in Matabeleland South province, the Minister of Finance and Economic Development Professor Mthuli Ncube has said. He said the large chunk of the money will go towards infrastructure development. The Minister made the remarks while touring the US$300 million Beitbridge border modernization project recently. “We have exchanged notes with the Minister responsible for devolution in this area (Abednico Ncube) on the importance of accelerating the implementation of the projects in line with the government thrust. As a quick win solution, we have availed RTGS$154 million to Beitbridge district to buy graders to be used in maintaining and servicing roads under Beitbridge Municipality, Beitbridge East and West constituencies respectively,” said Prof Ncube. He said one of the major outstanding projects in Matabeleland South was the completion of the Tuli-Manyange Dam, which is key in boosting irrigation-based agriculture in Gwanda district. Matabeleland South Provincial Affairs Minister, Abednico Ncube said they will use part of the $2, 3 billion to construct roads, dams, schools, primary health centres among others. He said other planned projects include the procurement of graders and rigs to drill more boreholes to ensure access to clean water. A few weeks ago, Government availed $40 million to the District Development (DDF) as initial funding  to rehabilitate the road network in the province. DDF provincial coordinator, Mr Moment Malandu recently said they were expecting more funds and an additional grader to boost their capacity on the ground. He said they had requested from government a total of $229 million. “The money will be used for spot graveling, regrading, reshaping, culverts, piped drifts, and bridges construction and we are now busy on the ground rehabilitation major selected roads. Our current target is to work on a total of 179 km in Beitbridge, 63 km in Mudinane, 109km in Gwanda, 136km in Insiza, 119km in Matobo, 127km in Bulilima, and 75 km in Mangwe districts respectively,” said Mr Malandu. Meanwhile, the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure Development is in the midst of assessing the state of major roads in Matabeleland South’s seven administrative districts to ascertain the extent of rainfall-induced damages. @tupeyo