The Chronicle Melissa Mpofu, Showbiz Editor
Fast-rising media personality, MisRed (real name Samantha Musa) has proved to be a force to reckon with after being featured in Facebook’s new book, LeadHERs: Life Lessons From African Women that has been launched as part of the celebrations around International Women’s Month. Announcing the launch of the book which is a collection of inspiration stories and life advice from 19 women who are breaking boundaries in fields such as media, entertainment, politics, education and business, the social media networking company said: “Available for free in digital and physical formats, the book provides inspirational real-life stories for future generations and young leaders. Each chapter focuses on a personal experience and life lesson around how these women have navigated their path to success, alongside the challenges they have had to overcome along the way,” Facebook said in a statement. “LeadHERs: Life Lessons from African Women is aimed at encouraging, inspiring and guiding the reader — no matter the background, age or ambition. The book follows on from the successful 2020 launch of Inspiring #Changemakers: Lessons from Life and Business in South Africa.” In her piece, MisRed, who is a radio host on ZiFM Stereo, shares her journey with highlights on early adulthood, family and evolvement into becoming one of the biggest radio hosts, media personality and entrepreneur in Zimbabwe. Other women featured in the book are Elizabeth Akua Ohene, a journalist and politician (Ghana); Alice Nkom, a lawyer and human rights activist (Cameroon); Tecla Chemabwai, an athlete and educator (Kenya); Baratang Miya, a tech entrepreneur and CEO (South Africa); Hindou Oumarou Ibrahim, a global activist (Chad); Dr Judy Dlamini, an entrepreneur, author and philanthropist (South Africa) and Hawa Sally Samai, a founder, CEO and campaigner (Sierra Leone). Commenting on the feature, MisRed who is highly active on social media platforms where she commands thousands of followers said this nod by Facebook has proven that she is doing something right. “I’m more than excited to be part of such a project that speaks about and celebrates women in different places around the Africa. To also be featured as one of the exceptional women in the media space is an icing to the cake. “Everyone who knows me knows that my passion for digital media is always evident and getting institutions like Facebook noticing such gives more flame to the fire,” said the vibrant media personality. With over 5 000 copies printed, LeadHERs: Life Lessons from African Women will be provided for free to a number of Facebook’s local training partners including She Leads Africa, Fate Foundation, DigifyAfrica, Siyafunda, Smart Ecosystems for Women and cCHub. These will be distributed across 15 countries including Zimbabwe. This March also marks the third anniversary of Facebook’s #SheMeansBusiness programme in Sub-Saharan Africa, an initiative designed to inspire, empower and train female entrepreneurs across the continent to build, grow and start their own businesses.