The Chronicle Business Editor INFORMATION Communication Technologies (ICTs) are fast becoming a transformation agent in all walks of life across the globe. Apart from attracting huge investment in different economic sectors, ICTs have enhanced operational efficiency in management and provision of services among a host of other benefits. Chronicle Business Editor Prosper Ndlovu (PN) conducted an interview with Michael Fletcher (MF), Ruckus Wireless’ sales director for sub-Saharan Africa, on the significance and benefits of embracing ICTs in the education sector. Ruckus is a United States headquartered global WiFi equipment manufacturing firm with partnership operations in Zimbabwe through ProComm and Frolgate. PN: What is the importance of connectivity in schools? MF: Connectivity in schools allows pupils to have access to the internet, which enables pupils to have unlimited access to information.
This is vital in today’s learning environment. While textbooks still play an important role in the school curriculum — they’re somewhat outdated as information on the internet is updated in real-time and on a daily basis. Today’s 21st century pupil has the opportunity to be a digital learner, enabling them not to be restricted to the information that has been written in a book years ago, or on a teacher’s blackboard. Some schools in Zimbabwe have seen the opportunities and benefits that advanced technology can bring into the teaching/ learning process and have started getting more actively involved here, which is so important in today’s technology dominated world! PN: How can teachers and pupils benefit from such technological advancements? MF: It enables a better teacher/ learner experience as it opens up new and improved ways to teach and learn, accessing information simultaneously and interacting. This also doesn’t have to be limited to the classroom. In fact, today, some schools across Africa have become smart schools by totally removing the pen to paper learning process and use tablets as exercise books with the teacher using an electronic whiteboard. This also allows parents to have a full view of what is being taught in class and be able to interact with the teacher immediately instead of waiting for a parent’s meeting that takes place every few months. Additionally, should parents have any concerns regarding the curriculum being taught, they can raise their concerns there and then. Meetings can be virtual, saving all parties time that can be spent fulfilling other tasks. PN: The role of advanced technology in the schooling system — how important is this? MF: There is no doubt that technology has changed the way we communicate as it enables real-time interactions — and putting this platform in the hands of schoolchildren and even varsity/college students can have a positive impact on the entire learning process from access to books, information and case studies, real time feedback and monitoring of progress. We live in the digital age and almost everything is going online. 21st century students have the opportunity to harness the opportunities that being a digital learner bring including, the opportunity to learn within and beyond the classroom. PN: WiFi has been dubbed as the best technology option for the schooling system. Why is this the case and how would WiFi change the way universities/schools in Zimbabwe currently operate? MF: WiFi is a cost-effective and easy to implement solution. WiFi in schools/universities in Zimbabwe will enable new educational practices to emerge. Ubiquitous access to the Internet means that schools in Zimbabwe can take advantage of the best learning practices used globally and tailor it to make it locally relevant and feasible for their schooling systems. When access to virtually unlimited resources of knowledge becomes available anywhere and anytime, our educators and students can start to take advantage of those resources, probably in ways that we didn’t think would be possible 10 years ago. PN: Which stakeholders need to come together to make WiFi a necessity in schools/universities across the country? MF: Government participation is key — but they cannot do it alone. As such, public private partnerships are essential. The best approach is to start small—– with a school or university at a time. Based on the learning from the first school/university you will have a better understanding on how to approach the next phase, should it be a success. If you take South Africa for example, there are industry players such as Project Isizwe (an initiative that aims to provide free WiFi to citizens and students through Ruckus Wireless equipment) and they have rolled out Free Internet Zones (FIZ) sites at schools in Mamelodi, Atteridgeville and Soshanguve for the City of Tshwane project, which is currently in phase three. The initiative started small with one province and is expanding due to the positive feedback and uptake. One thing is clear, as Africans we are hungry for connectivity. PN: WiFi has been available in universities in other countries in Africa for a while now — do you think Zimbabwe has done much in adopting this technology? MF: I don’t think Zimbabwe has been that far behind other African countries. The challenge has been a lack of a clear and dedicated body that specifically deals with ICT in education in Zimbabwe which hinders the Government’s noble objectives. I can safely say progress has been made, as there are a number of educational facilities across the country that have WiFi as a service on their premises for students. PN: What role model societies or case studies do you have where such interventions have worked? MF: As Ruckus Wireless, we have been working in the country with local partners ProComm and Frolgate to bring WiFi to students at the following universities; University of Zimbabwe, Chinhoyi University of Technology, Bindura University of Science Education and St George’s College. These deployments have been a success and we have received great feedback from all parties involved. In fact, these WiFi deployments enable thousands of learners to be connected. PN: Comment on the sustainability and economic value of the initiative in relation to suppressed economic growth? MF: Having an educated nation is the backbone of any country’s economy. While Africa is still a developing continent we have made great strides in improving our competitiveness as a continent — and as countries individually. Connectivity is still a major bottleneck in Africa and initiatives such as this enable our future leaders to be exposed to as much knowledge as possible through connectivity — providing them with the ability to up-skill and educate themselves too. Technology is a powerful tool that is connecting us to the world and enabling us to groom techno-savvy future leaders. This is why it makes sense to start such initiatives in various schooling systems. PN: In summary, what would you say about Ruckus Wireless, its operations and detail activities in Zimbabwe? MF: Ruckus Wireless is a global WiFi equipment manufacturer. Our work in Zimbabwe is currently being achieved through our local Zimbabwean partners (ProComm and Frolgate) in an effort of using WiFi to improve socio-economic development in the country. Our WiFi solutions have been mainly used in Zimbabwe to improve the educational system (private, secondary and tertiary) but our solutions also cater for other industries including; retail, warehousing, hospitality, healthcare and transportation just to name a few. We have a great relationship with our partners, they like our products and services because they work seamlessly so we hope this will lead to further projects in Zimbabwe as we fight this African digital divide challenge one access point at a time.
The company has invented and has patented state-of-the-art wireless voice, video, and data technology innovations, such as adaptive antenna arrays that extend signal range, increase client data rates, and avoid interference, providing consistent and reliable distribution of delay-sensitive multimedia content and services over standard 802.