The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter The Zifa Southern Region board has put in motion processes for the imminent return of football, with the competitions committee having already drawn up fixtures for the 2021 season. In his communique to clubs, regional boss Andrew ‘Squad’ Tapela said his board will soon start visiting clubs to apprise them of the developments, including assessing teams’ home grounds as well as attending to issues of the Fifa Covid-19 relief funds. “The Covid-19 pandemic has indeed brought about untold suffering to our nation. Our football has not been spared; it has been in limbo for quite some time. We have felt the loneliness and uncertainty, and have been deprived of our excitement and suspense we used to enjoy. “However, after rigorous engagement, we thank God and the authorities for the recent news that the return of football is now work in progress. Indeed, this is welcome news and once again the excitement and anxiety has been triggered. It is against this backdrop that there is now need to apprise you of what has been going on during this period of inactivity and silence,” wrote Tapela. He said his board has been busy engaging the corporate world despite the game being on ice, but they face challenges because of the pandemic that has seen companies’ cash flows being badly hit. “As l indicated earlier that the pandemic left a trail of dispair and uncertainty, most companies, both current and prospective sponsors, have been hard hit by the effects of the pandemic. We have been engaging them with a view to revisiting our partnerships. For now, the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. Things will be much clearer once the roadmap is clearly defined. More details will be unpacked at our annual general meeting on a date to be advised. “I urge all clubs to start igniting all their departments from the executive members, players, support staff and all those who matter. We should not be caught napping when the ‘hour comes’. Sharpen your swords for the battle is about to begin. Club secretaries should always be in touch with the board member (for) administration for any updates,” said Tapela.