The Chronicle Midlands Bureau Chief
Midlands Province has recorded an encouraging decrease in Covid-19 cases with no patients admitted to hospitals since March 8 as the province gears up for the second phase of vaccination of frontline workers. The province is coming from a time when more than 500 Covid-19 patients would be admitted to isolation centres set up by the Government with the assistance of some private players. Officials say the fact that the province has not had a single hospitalised patient for almost two weeks shows that there is a great decrease in the rate of infection. The province received 13 800 doses of Sinopharm vaccine for vaccination of frontline workers. It is moving into the second phase of vaccination which will cover teachers and other people that want vaccination. Government is offering free testing, admission and treatment for Covid-19 patients, including case follow-ups. Midlands Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister, Larry Mavima said it was pleasing that as of March 8, 30 436 people in the province had been tested for Covid-19. “Midlands Province has recorded an encouraging decrease in Covid-19 cases with no patients in hospital as of March 8. As of to date 2 413 have tested positive and Midlands Covid-19 cases decreased. Unfortunately, 65 people died of Covid-19 since its outbreak last year. Recoveries as of 8 March were at 2 334, while active cases were at seven, which means the cases have really gone down and we need to maintain that by strict enforcement of lockdown policies,” he said. Minister Mavima said Gweru recorded 1 034 positive cases, with 35 deaths and 992 recoveries, Kwekwe recorded 219 positive cases, with 11 deaths and 207 recoveries since March last year when the first cases were recorded in the country. Mberengwa, he said, recorded 26 positive cases, which all recovered, while Shurugwi recorded 451 positive cases, with six deaths and 443 recoveries. Minister Mavima said Zvishavane had 343 positive cases, with six deaths and 333 recoveries. “Chirumanzu district recorded 42 positive cases, which all recovered, Gokwe North recorded 67 positive cases which also recovered. Fatalities were recorded in Gokwe South where seven people died out of 134 cases, with 127 recoveries,” he said. Minister Mavima said they were happy that President Mnangagwa relaxed lockdown restrictions but the public should continue masking up, social distancing and sanitising. Minister Mavima dismissed assertions that the vaccines were not safe as there have been no adverse effects. Gweru Provincial Hospital has one of the country’s best Covid-19 management centres. It is partly-funded by a local private company and has over 17 ventilators which are ready for use for patients that require equipment to assist in their healing.