The Chronicle PREM club chiefs will help agree how to improve VAR next term when they meet virtually on Thursday. The latest meeting of the 20 “shareholder” clubs is due to discuss the feedback from the survey commissioned by League bosses. Clubs have been given an extra 48 hours, until Wednesday to return their thoughts on a series of incidents that have taken place this season. Fans and players alike have voiced their frustrations over some crunch calls especially over defensive handballs and penalty decisions. It is hoped that the responses of players and managers will enable refs’ chief Mike Riley and his officials to agree on a consistent approach for the new campaign from August. League bosses and clubs accept that subjective refereeing calls mean there can never be 100 percent consistency. But the aim is to give all officials clearer starting points for their decisions, either on the pitch or in the VAR booth at Stockley Park. So far there have been 99 on-field decisions in the Prem this season altered after VAR intervention. Liverpool have been the hardest hit, with a net six “goals” chalked off, costing them four points. West Ham, by contrast, have gained four points from VAR decisions in their favour. Without VAR, Liverpool would have been fourth in the table, two points ahead of Chelsea, with the Hammers down in eighth. Brighton have three points fewer than they would have won without VAR, costing them three places in the table. The bottom four, though, are unchanged. At the same stage last term there had been 81 changes, with the season’s aggregate of 109 overturns almost certain to be surpassed this time round. One of the reasons for the higher number was the initial hardline approach to handballs which was relaxed after Riley received dispensation from the International FA Board to be less doctrinaire. Ifab has now clarified that goals will only be ruled out next season if an accidental handball is committed by the scorer, while the law-makers agreed that there is more margin for defenders to handle if they are in a “natural position”. — BBC