The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
THE movement of commercial cargo that had been stalled by a five-hour demonstration by South Africa taxi operators at the Beitbridge Border Post early yesterday has improved after police in the neighbouring country moved in to restore order. Scores of taxi owners had parked their vehicles between the border entrance and the Shell filling station, blocking all outgoing and incoming traffic in that country. Sources in Musina said the protesters were claiming that the delay in the opening of land borders including Beitbridge by Zimbabwean authorities was affecting their revenue inflows since few people are using their services. “They were saying that the rigid trucks (light commercial) and other Zimbabwean registered vehicles must not be allowed entry into that country until Zimbabwe fully reopens its borders. “In addition, they were demanding that the cross-border transporters known as omalaitsha be allowed to transport goods into Zimbabwe,” said the source. At the height of the fracas, South African authorities were forced to close gates to the border. Limpopo police spokesperson Brigadier Motlafela Mojapelo said they had restored order. “We confirm that there was a protest action by RSA-Zimbabwe Cross-Border Taxi Association which resulted in the border gate being closed. “The incident took place in the early hours of this morning (yesterday), Friday 12 March 2021. According to information, the protesters were complaining about buses and taxis from Zimbabwe ferrying passengers to South Africa which left them out of business,” said Brig Mojapelo. He said members of the South African Police Services’, Public Order Police (POPS) unit, and Beitbridge Border Post police engaged the leadership of the protesters to manage the situation. Brig Mojapelo said they had agreed in principle that the disgruntled taxi operators must engage with the police whenever they have disputes before contemplating any protest action. “After the engagements, the blockade was called off and the road has been cleared and it’s now accessible to motorists. Our POPS members are however, monitoring the situation,” said Brig Mojapelo. A Zimbabwean border official speaking on condition of anonymity said the blockade had resulted in commercial cargo piling up in the border and on the major highway leading to Bulawayo. “The movement is gradually improving, and we hope to clear the backlog soon,” said the official. At the moment only Zimbabweans who are legally resident in foreign countries, foreigners, diplomats on government business and commercial cargo conveyors are allowed to exit through the country’s land borders. On arrivals, only bodies for burial, Zimbabweans returning home, foreigners who are legally resident in Zimbabwe and commercial cargo drivers are allowed to enter the country. In addition, all those using the borders are being subjected to a number of Covid-19 screening including the production of health clearance certificates with a validity of 48 hours for other travellers. Truck drivers must produce certificates valid for 30 days while those using light commercial trucks must produce certificates valid for two weeks.