The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
A SURVEY has established that most of the country’s citizens lack adequate information on the Covid-19 vaccination rollout programme. The Zimbabwe Christian Alliance (ZCA) conducted an online survey using WhatsApp platform to gather citizens’ views on their stance with regards to Covid-19 vaccination rollout programme. Government which recently received 200 000 Covid-19 vaccine doses from China, has started vaccinating frontline workers who are covered under its first phase of the vaccination programme which will ultimately be extended to all citizens. More vaccine doses are expected in the country this month. More than 32 000 frontline workers have been vaccinated since the launch of the vaccination programme about two weeks ago. A ZCA advocacy team conducted the survey which included 561 participants countrywide to try and appreciate why some people are seemingly reluctant to be vaccinated. According to the report, respondents who expressed willingness to be vaccinated, said they have been vaccinated before for other ailments and hence trust the scientific process while those who were not willing cited inadequate information on the vaccine, its alleged side effects, religious convictions and mistrust. The remainder of the population was undecided as they said they require more information. “The survey was conducted on ZCA local structure WhatsApp groups. The groups are made up of church leaders, women and youths across the country’s 10 provinces. The survey areas/ groups in which the survey questions were administered include; Chegutu, Gwanda, Chinhoyi, Plumtree, Binga, Hwange, Lupane, Beitbridge, Chirumhanzu, Masvingo, Bulawayo, Gweru, Nkayi, The National hub (all provinces) and the secretariat group,” reads the report. The report states that most people lacked knowledge on Covid-19 vaccine doses hence their scepticism on being vaccinated. “A major finding that was captured during the survey is that many people are ignorant about a plethora of issues around acquisition, administration and side effects of the vaccine. This is a cause for concern as the Covid-19 pandemic has had dire effects globally. One respondent to the survey had this to ask; “Sorry to ask — is this vaccine compulsory or its by choice?” illustrating the need to up information dissemination by the responsible authorities,” reads the report. The ZCA report also observed that the Covid-19 pandemic adversely affected communities as lives have been lost, businesses shut down and the pattern of life for many communities altered. “The effects of the pandemic have seen many affected persons resorting to crime and in some instances domestic violence as a coping mechanism. All over the world, many governments have imposed lockdowns as a measure to curb the spread of the pandemic. In response various initiatives to alleviate the plight of affected citizens have been carried out by governments and non-state actors. With no cure, the focus has been on prevention and awareness,” reads the ZCA report. “On a global scale, governments have resolved that to circumvent the spread of the virus, massive vaccination should carried out.” In an interview, ZCA director Reverend Useni Sibanda said there is need for stakeholders involvement in the rollout of the Covid-19 vaccine. “The research we did also proves the huge gap in terms of access to information on the vaccination process and fears that people have. What is urgent is awareness campaigns that will help people to make informed decisions on why they should take or not take the vaccine. The information should also show how vaccination benefits and protects the rest of the community,” said Rev Sibanda. “Churches will play an important role in that awareness campaign hence there is a need for strategic partnership between the Ministry of Health and Child Care and churches. This will ensure that correct information and knowledge is passed on to communities leading to a change of attitudes and behaviours.” — @nqotshili