The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
VICE President Kembo Mohadi has resigned from his post, saying his decision was necessitated by the need to save the image of Government following allegations of immoral unions which showed grim persistence in the past few days. His resignation yesterday came barely a week after he held a press conference in Harare during which he told journalists that his voice was cloned by detractors angling to tarnish his image as a national political leader by portraying alleged immoral unions. This followed recent social media hype about his alleged illicit relationships with two married women. In a statement, VP Mohadi maintained his innocence saying he is a victim of “information distortion, voice cloning, and sponsored spooking and political sabotage.” He said his enemies used the digital media to blackmail him. “Digital media, in their hybridity, have been abused by my enemies to blackmail me, but my spirit will never die. “Following the recurring dis-information and virilisation of my alleged immoral unions, dispensed through awkward slacktivism, I am stepping down as the Vice President of the Republic of Zimbabwe in terms of Section 96(2) of the constitution of Zimbabwe (No.20) Act, 2013 with immediate effect,” he said. VP Mohadi said after going through “a soul-searching pilgrimage”, he realised that he needed the space to deal with his problems outside the governance chair. “Hard as it may be to my family, friends, comrades and cadres of my party Zanu-PF, I am taking the decision to step down as Vice-President of Zimbabwe, to save the image of my Government. “My decision to relinquish the Vice-President post is also a way of respecting the citizens of this great nation, and my party comrades, some of whom would have been affected by the falsehoods and character assassination in the digital ecosystems,” he said. VP Mohadi said his decision to step down was not a culmination of cowardice, but a sign of demonstrating great respect to the Office of the President so that “it is not compromised by actions that are linked to my challenges as an individual.” “My resignation is also necessitated by my desire to seek clarity and justice on the matter in which my legal team will pursue and deconstruct this pseudo-paparazzi and flawed espionage to achieve cheap political points. I promise to poke holes on this grand strategy from political foes,” he said. VP Mohadi said interconnectivity with social media ecologies have been relaying viral moral panics, peddling flames of lies, creating myths and muddling the reality of his life as a family man. He thanked President Mnangagwa, Zanu-PF cadres and the citizenry for the unprecedented support. “The energy, the faith, the devotion which you have in this Government, must light your respective responsibilities and glow from this light must truly light the world. In my political journey, I have learnt that there are no winners or losers in governance, but we are pilgrims tied to a single garment of destiny,” he said. “I wish the President of Zimbabwe well, as he continues to bear the burden of a struggle to improve the lives of Zimbabweans, to rejoice in hope and patience, in tribulation against poverty, Covid-19 and Vision 2030.” — @mashnets