The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
HIGHLANDERS auditors PN and A Chartered Accountants told members at the club’s annual general meeting on Sunday that decisions made by the Kenneth Mhlophe led executive after the end of their tenure on February 7 have to be approved by the new executive that’ll be elected this Sunday. Johnfat Sibanda is challenging incumbent Kenneth Mhlophe for the position of club chairman while Morgan “Gazza” Dube will battle it out for the secretary-general’s position with incumbent Israel Moyo. Mgcini Mafu and Bheka Sibanda are contesting the committee member’s post. In the report, the auditors said the club’s constitution states that the annual general meeting shall be held during the month of January and since it wasn’t held due to Covid-19, decisions made by the executive committee have to be approved by the new executive committee. The auditors also said they were not furnished with information regarding donations the club received during the period under review. After the board extended the term of office of three executive committee members, the executive entered into two agreements, the Sanctuary Insurance and hiring of the juniors’ coaches led by Madinda Ndlovu. The other coaches are Gift Lunga Jr, Sizabantu Khoza and Dan Ngwenya. “We were unable to obtain sufficient and appropriate audit evidence on the completeness of the donations income included in the statement of profit and loss and other comprehensive income amounting to $2 026 036 for the year ending 31 December 2020. We were unable to obtain sufficient and appropriate evidence relating to donations made through independent campaigns by supporter groups as the executive committee has no control on the donations raised (and) therefore could not prove to us (that) the amounts collected in the donations campaign are complete,” wrote the auditors. “The constitution of Highlanders Football Club requires the executive committee to ensure all assets of the football club are insured. However, during our audit we note that some of the football club’s assets were not insured which was a departure from the constitution. As a result of this matter, we were unable to determine whether any adjustments might have been found necessary in respect of recorded or unrecorded insurance and the elements making up the statement of comprehensive income, statement of changes in equity and statement of cash flows. “The constitution also states that the annual general meeting of the club shall be held during the month of January, but due to Covid-19 restrictions, the football club was unable to hold the annual general meeting. Since the annual general meeting could not be held in January, decisions made by the executive committee would have to be approved or reversed by the new executive committee. Our opinion was modified accordingly,” they wrote. While the annual general meeting was supposed to be held on January 31, meaning the executive ought to have prepared for the meeting by then, the financial statement prepared by club treasurer Donald Ndebele was approved by the board on March 20, a day before Sunday’s meeting. Meanwhile, Mhlophe declined to respond to a member’s question on where capital for the Inyathi gold mining venture would come from. “Let’s not be pessimistic, the mine will bring funds to the club. Why are people sceptical; what if all goes well, lizathini?” said Mhlophe in response to life member Cornelius Ngwazana, who wanted to know where funding would come from when the club was struggling to run its core business of football. 