The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE Premier Soccer League has exhorted Zifa to deal with the 2020 player contracts and loans to facilitate for a smooth-flow of football when matches resume. PSL chief executive officer Kennedy Ndebele raised the need to explain player contracts and loans, which threaten to create conflicts between teams, in a working document titled “football restart” that also outlines the roadmap to kickstart activities. The proposals are yet to be adopted by the league’s governors but was sent to Zifa and the clubs for consideration. According to the document, the PSL which had given clubs up to last Friday to submit their registration details, which include club directors and secretariat as well as the provisional players’ retainers list, had proposed that teams submit player registration documents by March 31. “Clubs will be expected to re-submit relevant documents for player registration before 31 March 2021. Zifa will be expected to issue a clear policy on the 2020 contracts and loan agreements. Players will be issued with licenses to participate in all football matches,” reads part of the league’s proposal. Bulawayo Chiefs cried foul when FC Platinum sold Perfect Chikwende to Tanzania, in a move disregarding Zifa’s December 31, 2020, guidelines on player contracts. Chicken Inn have also been breathing fire after their player Tinashe Chipunza moved as a “free-agent” to Zambian side Nkana. In December last year, Zifa-issued guidelines that contracts that were supposed to end in December 2020 should roll over into this year. FC Platinum refused to compensate Chiefs arguing that the Bulawayo team misinterpreted Zifa-issued guidelines clarifying that contracts that were due to expire in 2020 would roll over into 2021. It is such conflicts that the PSL wants to avoid by asking Zifa to clarify the 2020 player contracts issue. Zifa emphasised that the guidelines were aimed at providing a general guideline on how contractual issues are to be governed during the Covid-19 pandemic lockdown. – @ZililoR