The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
Victoria Falls City Council needs a dedicated power line connected to the municipal water works for the local authority to solve its permanent water challenges. Victoria Falls has recurrent water problems caused by constant breakdowns of equipment at the pump station compounded by unscheduled power cuts as a result of recurrent faults to the feeder electricity line. As a result, residents and businesses usually endure water shedding which has sometimes caused animosity between council management and ratepayers. The city fathers have been blaming the perennial water challenges in the resort town to lack of capacity by the Zimbabwe National Water Authority (Zinwa) whose equipment reportedly constantly breaks down at the pump station. President Mnangagwa, while commissioning city status to the municipality in December last year, ordered Local Government and Public Works Minister July Moyo to direct Zinwa to hand over water management rights to the new city putting to rest a long-standing battle for control of water supply between the water authority and council. In an interview yesterday, town clerk Mr Ronnie Dube said the handover is yet to be done as they are still doing administration work towards the process. He however said residents should be cognisant of the fact that even, if water rights are given to the council, this will not make water cheaper in the resort city. He was making reference to sentiments by residents who have been saying council should start reducing water charges since Government had ordered Zinwa to hand over water rights. Mr Dube said a permanent solution for the city water problems is a dedicated power line while using solar or diesel as alternatives was not feasible because of capital outlay and operating costs. Zesa quoted the local authority US$360 000 for a dedicated line which the council does not have and Government reportedly pledged to help the tourism Special Economic Zone capital. “We haven’t received water rights from Zinwa as the process is still underway. It’s work in progress. The President made the announcement and the process is being done, we are doing administration work. “People however should understand that even if we receive water rights, water won’t be as cheap as they say because input costs will still be there. What won’t be there is only the inefficiency that has been causing the challenge,” said Mr Dube. Residents have been saying water should not be expensive in Victoria Falls because the Zambezi River where the council draws its water through Zinwa is only a stone throw away. Residents have also been imploring council to replace electricity with either solar or generator to solve constant power outages. Mr Dube said solar and generator are unthinkable in the obtaining situation. “We wish Government could treat us differently because we are the epicentre of the hospitality industry in the country. The challenge we will still have in the absence of Zinwa is Zesa. Zesa quoted us US$360 000 for a dedicated line and we don’t have such kind of money. Government promised to help. “Solar is not feasible because the capital outlay for it is high. Operating costs for a generator are also prohibitive hence a dedicated line will be a better option although in the long term solar becomes cheaper,” he said. — @ncubeleon