The Chronicle Nelias Shiri, Chronicle Reporter A SUSPECTED serial fraudster in Bulawayo who allegedly swindled five people of more than US$ 13 000 in a fake residential plot scam, is battling to get bail. Washington Construction (Private) Limited Company managing director, Washington Ferera (40) of Cowdray Park, had pleaded guilty to five counts of fraud before Bulawayo Magistrate Ms Rachel Mukanga He was once granted bail on similar charges and defrauded more people. Ferera was listed among wanted persons who had committed various offences of fraud in Bulawayo by CID Commercial Crime Division Southern Region on March 29, 2019. Ms Mukanga ruled that an application for bail pending trial will be looked at today and remanded Ferera in custody to April 1 in the interim. Ferera is facing five counts of fraud as defined in section 136 of the Criminal Law (Codification and Reform) Act Chapter 9:23. Ms Mukanga said Ferera failed to give plausible defence at law against the serious allegations he is facing. “He defrauded his clients of thousands of dollars and was arrested before absconding and committing the same offence again,” said Ms Mukanga. Ms Mukanga said there was no guarantee that if granted bail Ferera would not abscond given the gravity of the crime committed. “The temptation to flee and abscond is real in view of the State’s case since the accused person has a propensity of absconding and breaching bail conditions. “I’m aware that under our law the seriousness of the case on its own is not a ground to deny an applicant bail pending trial, but other factors have to be taken into account. The applicant, in my view, is a flight risk, and I’m not satisfied that if granted bail, he would stand trial, the application for bail pending trial will be ruled tomorrow,” said Ms Mukanga. Prosecuting Mr Owen Mugari said on December 20, 2013 Ferera advertised in a local newspaper that he was selling a plot at Karton Farm. The selling price of the plot was pegged at US$ 3 500 and the complainant Ms Sifiso Ngwenya (43) agreed to pay in instalments for a period of three years. Ms Ngwenya was allocated plot number 39 Karton Farm and paid US$2 338 in instalments. “In February 2015, the complainant visited the accused’s offices and found that he had vacated the place. She tried to locate the farm but failed only to discover that the farm did not belong to the accused person and she made a police report,” said Mr Mugari. Ferera allegedly used the same modus operandi to con four more people. — @waydenaido.