The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent NEWLY formed online radio station, Nkomza radio station that is operating from South Africa is making inroads in promoting locals specialising in different fields in the neighbouring country. A brainchild of Bulawayo-born friends Allen “Nkomza” Nkomo and Siyabonga “Snap” Moyo, the station debuted online last month. Since then, it has been broadcasting daily. Nkomza said the radio was set up after the realisation that youths had turned to drugs for extra-curricular activities. Through music and educational programmes on the station, Nkomza said they want to reach out to these youths to ensure they change their ways and instead, set their minds on growth and development. “Snap and I came to the realisation that about 45% of youngsters take drugs or abuse substances so we decided to try and assist by reaching out to them and their respective communities. “The idea was to also promote our Zimbabwean brothers and sisters in the entertainment industry, business owners and up-and-coming young people with a dream of purpose,” said Nkomza. He said with a hardworking team that includes Nosiphetho Mkhonzi, Bonweli Nkomo, Spha, Edith Ndlovu and DJ Nomfazi, they have managed to put to test, their zeal of supporting local artistes as they have hosted the likes of Madlela Skhobokhobo, Mxolisi “Mr Bones” and Insimbi zeZhwane live at their Midrand studios. “As a station, we’d like to thank the hardworking team and everyone who has given us love and support so far as we’re growing slowly, but surely. “We’re now working on getting a radio frequency as this will help grow our vision of raising the Zimbabwean flag higher,” said Nkomza. The station’s daily programmes include the breakfast show from 0630am to 10am hosted by DJ Nomfazi with the second breakfast show with DJ Allen from 10am to midday. From 1pm, Nkomza Radio station hosts the lunch time show with Snap Mr International up to 6pm. Local music is played all night. On weekends, they host musical shows where they promote local genres among them rhumba and tshibilika. Chart shows are also evolving. – @mthabisi_mthire 