The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
THE Zimbabwe Rugby Union (ZRU) on Monday met stakeholders in Bulawayo to find out their state of preparedness ahead of the resumption of the game in the city. ZRU president Aaron Jani met clubs, coaches, administrators and schools in the province to establish their readiness for resumption. The Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC) said it is not financially assisting associations which means ZRU like other associations will bear its costs. The ZRU is looking at various options to restart. “We have a couple of options that we are looking at and we want to hear from our stakeholders on their position first. On Monday we met people in Bulawayo to hear from them what they feel would be the way forward. The clubs are saying they don’t have the money to carry out the tests or buy vaccines. We will have to come in and assist as a union,” said ZRU vice-president (south) Martin Shone. “Another concern was on the Craven Week; remember this is only for the Under-14s so there is a call that we should also consider something for the Under-15 and Under-16. We also want to establish a girls’ festival which we will shed light on in due course. We are visiting all provinces so that we find out the challenges of each province,” he said. Shone said once the games resume, they expect provinces to engage their partners in organising more tournaments. The Dairibord Zimbabwe Rugby Festival, formerly Cottco Rugby Festival, is one of the biggest schools’ rugby festivals in Zimbabwe. The festival has grown to become one of the biggest rugby tournaments in the world, attracting participants from the southern African region and beyond. The festival has identified and nurtured talent and has produced stars such as Tendai Mtawarira, who won the Rugby World Cup with South Africa in 2019. Meanwhile, national 15s team manager Jason Maritz has announced a squad of 48 players that will report for camp in Harare on May 16 in preparation for the Rugby World Cup qualifying matches scheduled for July. Squad
Forwards: Tyron Fagan, Doug Juszczyk, Gabriel Sipapate, Simba Mandioma, Dean Makoni, Aaron Sawu, Royal Mwale, Farai Mudariki, Cleopas Kundiona, David Makanda, Jan Ferreira, Sean Beevor, Takunda Kundishora, Blithe Mavesere, Biselele Tshamala, Godfrey Muzanargwo, Mungo Mason, Seb Roche, Aiden Burne, Tonderai Chiwambutsa. Backs: Hilton Mudariki, Dudlee White – Sharpley, Kyle Galloway, Jason Robertson, Keith Chiwara, Tinashe Hombiro, Matthew McNab, Rufaro Chikwaira, Takudzwa Kumadiro, Brandon Boshi, Riaan O’Neill, Boyd Rouse, Marcus Nel, Brandon Mudzekenyedzi, Shingirai Katsvere, Shayne Makombe, Takudzwa Chieza, Martin Mangongo, Brandon Mandivenga, Tapiwa Mafura.
Invitational players: David Makamba, Bornwell Gwinji, Tino Musasanure.
Non-travelling reserves: Jeff Makoni, Tatenda Rwenyu, Keith Murray, Dustin Andrews, Daniel Capsopoulos