The Chronicle Business Reporter
MINES and Mining Development Minister Winston Chitando says skilled manpower is critical to realising an upper middle-income economy by 2030 and has challenged the Zimbabwe School of Mines (ZSM) to align its programmes to support the Government’s US$12 billion mining industry target by 2023. Minister Chitando, who was guest of honour during the 2020 ZSM virtual annual graduation ceremony on Friday, said under the Second Republic led by President Mnangagwa, the mining industry was expected to score higher growth targets. “For this vision to become a reality, and it is in the process of becoming a reality, the various sectors of the economy have to play their part to ensure that we increase productivity of the nation,” he said. “The challenge I give to the Zimbabwe School of Mines is to plan their work to ensure the short and long-term plans align to Vision 2030 and the US$12 billion milestone.” Chitando said the attainment of an upper middle-income economy was not an overnight event but a process that was already underway and requires collective effort from all stakeholders. The US$12 billion milestone entails the expansion of various mineral sectors that include but are not limited to gold, diamond, coal and hydrocarbon, chrome and the development of the steel sector, nickel and lithium. “Zimbabwe is endowed with more than 40 minerals. In the milestone, there are new mining areas coming up, there are new areas where there is going to be an increase in skills and ZSM has to play its part,” said the minister. “For example, in the coal and hydrocarbon sector, there is a huge increase in coke production, which entails that it’s important that we don’t have to import skills to fill up that gap. “Other areas include but are not limited to steel-making where there is going to be a huge increase in steel making facilities as well as smelters. “The Platinum Producers Association have indicated their willingness to participate in the value addition of platinum locally, which entails the establishment of base metals refinery and precious metal refinery. “Once again, the School of Mines has to align itself to ensure that they start planning for the development of such skills.” The event, which is ZSM’s 26th graduation ceremony saw 186 graduates being awarded national and higher national diplomas in mining geology, mine ventilation and environmental engineering, mining, mine surveying, mineral processing, extractive metallurgy and metallurgical assaying. Of the total graduates, 125 were males while 63 or 34 percent were females, an improvement from 30 percent in 2019. ZSM principal, Mr Edwin Gwaze, said the institution would continue to contribute to the development of the mining industry by offering various courses related to the sector. “The school has introduced blended learning intake, which is targeting mining cadets with experience. The intake shall admit 25 students per discipline for 2021, mines are encouraged to develop their staff through this programme,” he said.