The Chronicle Yvonne Ncube, Chronicle Reporter
A Bulawayo woman living with a disability is gaining a big social media following through videos of self-taught routines to maintain physical and mental well-being during the global Covid-19 induced lockdowns. While a majority of so-called able-bodied people are getting obese and frustrated with staying at home, wheelchair bound Soneni Gwizi is proving to be an inspirational hit with her motivational videos that have attracted more 4 000 followers. Covid-19 has changed the face of humanity and people’s lifestyles globally with lockdown regulations curtailing everyone from carrying out their day-to-day normal activities. Instead of moaning about her circumstance and trying to evoke pity, Gwizi has taken the opportunity to re-invent and better herself through learning new skills. The lockdown has made health services difficult to access, especially for persons living with disabilities who are medically required to undergo physiotherapy every now and then. Travelling has become a time bomb with the risk of contracting the novel virus anywhere along the way at its highest, thereby forcing people with disabilities to isolate in their homes. Occurrences have forced them to neglect their medically recommended lifestyles. However, that is not the case with Gwizi whose life is the embodiment of the adage; “disability does not mean inability.” Gwizi using the username NdiMhle Tuu! Lady Flawsome (@GwiziSoneni) took to Twitter to motivate other people with disabilities to maintain their physical health in the comfort of their homes. “As a people with disabilities, it’s important to follow all procedures so that we remain safe health wise,” she said. She said she is surviving lockdown through a routine of disabilities activities that are simple, fun and can improve one’s health, lifestyle and mental awareness, which she came up with. Not letting her condition discourage her, Gwizi has broken stereotypes on people with disabilities by crossing the boundaries that her physical stature limits her to and engaging in activities that are usually done by so called able-bodied people. “I started doing exercises with a soft ball once a week. I improved my cooking skills by spending more time in the kitchen unlike before. I also took up house chores like washing dishes and cleaning. All these activities are normally not part of our lifestyle as people with disabilities due to infrastructure and environment challenges in our homes,” she explained. Gwizi said she realised the activities were working for her so she decided to share them with people with similar challenges as herself. Through videos that she posts on Twitter, she demonstrates how she undertakes her exercises and how she takes up her house chores. “I realised that these activities were working out for me, so I just thought I could share this with my fellow counterparts, so that they don’t forget that our health is our responsibility regardless of the situations at hand,” explained Gwizi. The videos uploaded on Twitter include her washing potatoes and doing ball and rope exercises. “Most people with disabilities don’t come from well up homes and their access to disability friendly appliances is almost nil. This doesn’t mean we have to be restricted from doing home chores due to our kitchens not being built with a disabled person in mind. “We have to think outside the box and help around in the house,” she said. With the inspirational videos of her living beyond her disability challenge, she was able to attract a wide audience of more than 4 000 followers. However, it has not been smooth sailing as she has to overcome challenges everyday to maintain her new found passion. “Our kitchens were not built with people with disabilities in mind, navigating around the stove, reaching out for plugs can be a risk. I was zapped by electricity during my cooking sessions but it’s all part of the journey now I know what to avoid,” she said. She expressed the need for people with disabilities to take full responsibility for their lives and engage in home activities in order to have a sense of belonging and enjoy life like everyone else. Gwizi said regardless of the condition one finds themselves in, they should strive to rise to the challenge and be a champion. “I’ve learnt to live a normal life like an able-bodied person and that has helped me to instill a sense of self-belief and positive reputation regardless of my condition and I’m happy to say that has earned me much respect from the people around,” Gwizi said. — @SeehYvonne