The Chronicle Leonard Ncube in Hwange
A BLOCK of about two dozen incomplete houses built by the Zimbabwe Power Company (ZPC) for its workers on the outskirts of Hwange town have reportedly become a haven for crime as the project has been a white elephant over the past seven years There are about 28 houses built on a plain along Chibondo stream and illegal brick moulders have also invaded them. ZPC spokesperson Ms Prisca Utete had not responded to questions emailed to her on Tuesday, regarding the structures. A news crew visited the houses yesterday afternoon and noticed that all except for one which is at foundation level, had been roofed but not yet fitted with doors and windows. The power utility company reportedly condemned all the houses after the walls started cracking before completion of the structures. A Harare company had been contracted to build the houses before reportedly being ordered to stop about seven years ago. Cattle and goats from nearby villages have also turned the houses into pens. Hwange residents told the Chronicle the houses were being used for all manner of social ills as some people go there to have sex. Some criminals are also suspected to be staying in some of the houses from where they launch occasional attacks on unsuspecting residents in nearby DRC, Empumalanga and Chibondo suburbs. The houses are also hide-outs for illegal brick moulders when they are raided by Hwange Local Board officials. “We have seen men sneaking into those houses with women. They drive and leave their cars near the stream as if they are looking for bricks to buy and sneak into the houses and this happens during the day as well as in the night,” said Mr Max Munsaka, one of the brick moulders. He said brick moulders also used to run into the houses whenever they saw council officials approaching. Residents of DRC, Empumalanga, Chibondo and nearby villages, who sometimes use a path that passes through the area when coming from drinking beer at a bar located at Sinamatela National Park turn off, have been attacked and robbed near the houses. Matabeleland North police spokesperson Inspector Glory Banda could not readily comment on the issue. Greater Whange Residents Trust co-ordinator Mr Fidelis Chima said some residents have complained about criminal activities around the area. “It is surprising that those stands behind Don Bosco are not serviced until now. The neglect of those structures have made them become a haven for thieves and prostitutes as we have received reports of such incidents from residents,” said Mr Chima. He implored local authority officials to remove brick moulders, saying their presence was a breeding ground for crime. “It’s shocking that those stands behind Don Bosco have not been completed until now. The neglected structures have become a haven for thieves and sex workers. We have reports of some people who have complained that the place is becoming a no-go-area because of muggers. “We managed to approach the Environmental Management Agency and Hwange Local Board so they deal decisively with the issue of clay soil poaching but they continue to carry out cosmetic operations and it’s so sad that some of the nice stands and houses there have been damaged by clay poachers who dig everywhere and some houses are cracking and collapsing, “ he said. Hwange Local Board Ward Six Councillor Andrew Mumpande said there is need to raid the area. “If it’s true that there are criminal activities there the council should use the security department to bring sanity to the area. There is need to raid the place to flush out criminal elements. Those doing bricks should also know that it is not allowed here,” he said. — @ncubeleon