The Chronicle Harare Bureau
THE sporting fraternity will have to wait a bit before they know how they will proceed following the easing of the lockdown measures in the country as the Sports and Recreation Commission said they are in consultation with Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation Ministry regarding the possible resumption of sport. Sporting activities were suspended in January after the country moved back to Level Four lockdown after a spike in the positive Covid-19 cases. The sport codes that had been cleared to resume had to suspend their activities and put their plans on hold.
In a statement released late Monday, the Sports and Recreation Commission indicated that consultations are underway with the responsible Ministry on the way forward after the lockdown was relaxed on Monday. “Following the pronouncement regarding the easing of Covid-19 lockdown regulations by His Excellency, President E.D Mnangagwa today (Monday), the Sports and Recreation Commission advises its stakeholders that consultations are underway with its responsible Ministry regarding the possible resumption of sport by those low-risk disciplines previously authorised to undertake activities,” read a statement by the Sports Commission. After the suspension of all sporting activities those sport codes that had regional, continental and international commitments had to apply for approval for specific competitions they wanted to take part in. Some of those sport codes that were cleared to fulfil their assignments were football, for FC Platinum to participate in the CAF Champions League and Confederation Cup, the Zimbabwe National Paralympic Committee that had a team participating at the World Para Athletics Grand Prix. Zimbabwe Cricket also got approval for Pakistan Women’s team to tour Zimbabwe last month and the men’s team to undertake a tour to United Arab Emirates against Afghanistan. The Chevrons are facing Afghanistan in two Tests and three T20Is. Some of the low-risk sport codes that had been authorised to resume activities last year, prior to the January announcement on sports suspension include athletics, swimming, golf, tennis, cycling, cricket, equestrian, rowing and triathlon among others. Zimbabwe swimming chairperson Tracey Doorman yesterday said they are waiting for feedback from the Sports Commission on the how they will proceed. “We eagerly await feedback from SRC who I believe are in consultation with the relevant ministries over the resumption of low risk sport. Whether this will be training only or include competition remains to be seen. “Coaches, athletes and administrators alike want to see swimmers back in the water,” said Doorman. National Athletics Association of Zimbabwe president Tendai Tagara said they are hoping sport will resume in time for them to pursue their Olympic qualification plans. “We have already sent our request to SRC for a camp for the Olympics shortlisted athletes, training at the B Arena twice a week, provincial competitions and national competitions. We hope to start regional tours in April to Botswana, South Africa and Zambia. “We want to urge all athletes to run as many lead up competitions as possible, so that when it comes to qualifying competitions, they will be in shape. “Sport is overdue, the whole region is active, we must now follow suite if we are hoping to qualify for the Olympics, Africa Seniors and World Juniors (Championships). “We hope many juniors come to participate at our competitions for them to qualify for the World Juniors in Kenya,” Tagara said. Swimming and athletics are both among the sporting disciplines that are seeking qualification to the rescheduled Olympic Games. And for local based athletes, they have been relying on individual training at home. However, with the Covid-19 regulations relaxed there is a ray of hope, sport may start to return. 