The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
GROWING up in the Bulawayo suburb of Entumbane, football provided the only way out of poverty for former Highlanders striker Patrick “Mboma” Mpofu. Mpofu’s worked extra hard to make it into the Highlanders squad. Just like most lads that grew up playing street football in Bulawayo, the ultimate dream for Mpofu was to turn out for city giants Highlanders. To play for Highlanders, Mpofu, who earned the moniker Mboma after fellow footballers compared his style of play to that of Cameroonian legend Patrick M’Boma, the ex-Bosso forward had to go against his father’s wishes that he stays at city rivals Zimbabwe Saints with his more talented twin brother Paul. His football career started off at Manyewu Primary School in Entumbane where he did his primary between 1991 and 1997. But it was at Entumbane Secondary School where his talent began to blossom as a defender because of his height and ability to overlap. He was to later transform into a striker at a later stage in his career. He joined the Zimbabwe Saints’ Under-13 and Under-15 sides under the tutelage of the late Lazarus Zimangi, popularly known as Mukoma Juju. “My road to Highlanders started off at Zimbabwe Saints juniors where I played up to Under-15. In the Uder-15s, I played alongside Mtshumayeli Moyo, who was slightly older than me. Mtshumayeli also grew up in Entumbane and we were rivals in primary school games. He played for Mthombowesizwe while I turned out for Manyewu,” said Mpofu. “I then left for Amazulu where I joined the Under-15s. at Amazulu we were coached by the late Benjamin Moyo and there were a lot of Entumbane boys. Some of the guys I played with at Amazulu juniors that went on to play for Premiership sides include Charles Sibanda (ex-Highlanders, Hwange, FC Platinum and Motor Action forward) and Arnold Majaivana Tshuma (ex-Bosso and Bantu Rovers). It was at Amazulu where Benjy converted me into a striker,” he said. In 2002, Mpofu left Amazulu juniors for Border Strikers in Beitbridge and stayed in the border town for two years coached by the late Friday Phiri. It was at Border Strikers that Mpofu developed into a “complete” striker. “I was young and coming from junior football when I moved to Border Strikers. Horsepower (Madodana Tshabangu, famous for organising off-season soccer tournaments) took me to Beitbridge after talking to club owner Hosea Muleya, who took care of me like his young brother. I met former Highlanders player Dalisizwe Dlamini in Beitbridge as well as Lexington Mujokoro, brother to ex-Highlanders and ex-Amazulu midfielder Farai Mujokoro. “Lexington taught me how to shield the ball. He always said as young boys we must be at the training venue at least two hours before the rest of the team so that he works with us. He (Lexington) made me a complete striker.” Mpofu returned to Bulawayo in 2003 after getting a call from his nephew Josphat Sibanda, who was a Highlanders juniors’ goalkeeper. He joined Bosso and became a key member of the Under-19 squad that had the likes of Graham Ncube, Nhlanhla Dube, Mbuso Mandiopera, Innocent Nyoni (former Black Mambas goalkeeper and midfielder), the late Sifiso Nketha, Obidiah Tarumbwa, Zephaniah Ngodzo, Marshall Machazane, Brighton Dube, Brighton Choto and Thomas Muketiwa. In 2005, Highlanders first team coach Dick Chama and Madinda Ndlovu promoted Mpofu into the senior team.
And his winner in a 2-1 victory over a star-studded Caps United at Barbourfields Stadium made Mpofu an instant darling with the Bosso fans in the 2005 season. However, his failure to handle instant fame went on to affect his career. “I remember that game against Caps United at Barbourfields Stadium that I received the ball with my back to goal. I controlled it then turned and fired past the diving Caps United goalie. When I was told that I was in the first XI, Gift Lunga Jr said to me, uyamazi uLaughter Chilembe? I responded by saying ‘yena uLaughter uyamazi uMboma?’ “I went on to score eight more goals during the 2005 season, but my downfall I think was to think that I had made it. Everywhere I went, Highlanders supporters wanted to hang around with me. I went on to hang around with senior players and that instant fame killed my career. “I made some bad decisions which I regret and never wish any young players to go through. Had I kept focus, I was going to achieve more. I think when I lost my brother Peter in 2006, that is when I lost focus. Peter was my strength and always guided me,” said Patrick. When Methembe Ndlovu took over as Bosso coach in 2006, Mboma played half the before requesting to be loaned to Hwange FC where he was guaranteed first team action. In 2007, he left for Botswana to join Mokgoditsane Fighters where he was later joined by the late Highlanders defender Bekithemba Nkiwane. He spent four years in Botswana and returned in 2011 to join the now defunct Quelaton. “I came back to Quelaton after they lured me with property. They also gave me signing on money which I used to pay lobola. I think of all the teams I played for, the money I got at Quelaton was used for something meaningful. Had I been wiser when I was younger, I could have made the most out of my signing on fees,” said Mboma. He stayed for six months at Quelaton before retracing his boots to Botswana to join Motlakasi Power Dynamos in Palapye where he linked up with Siza Khoza, Hillary Madzivanyika and Maxwell Mburayi where they were coached by Madinda Ndlovu. Mpofu returned to Zimbabwe in 2013 and joined Beitbridge-based FC Strikers with Voster Chitema, Kenny Dokoza Msimanga, Danisa Phiri and Dube. In 2016 he moved closer to home, joining ZRP Bulawayo before moving to Bulawayo Chiefs where they won the Southern Region Division One League title. He hung his boots in 2018 and went to play money games in Johannesburg, South Africa. “The challenges that young footballers face is that when you break into a team, you think money is important more than the game and you start chasing money instead of developing your game. My background wasn’t rosy and at times you need someone to manage your affairs and advise you while you concentrate on football. “I’m happy to see that these days most footballers have agents handling their affairs. Even when negotiating, clubs now talk to your manager. For me, the fact that I came from Entumbane just made some coaches believe that I was taking ngoma (abusing cough mixture). I think people must see Entumbane for the talent it has and not as a drug haven. “Look, we do have footballers from Entumbane such as Charles Sibanda, Brian Banda, Xolisani Moyo and George Majika, who deserve to be celebrated. My plea to clubs is that they must judge footballers from Entumbane based on their talent and not perception associated with the suburb,” Mpofu said. – @ZililoR