The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
One of Ngoma Ingoma’s lead vocalists, De Lukes is now being managed by United Kingdom-based arts management company, Sapphire Rock as he moves to promote his solo career. Sapphire Rock also manages comedian Nceku and South African gospel singer, Zaza Mokhethi. De Lukes (real name Luke Kamanga) is an Afro-centric musician who was born and bred in Bulawayo. He fuses his genre with mbira and modern sounds backed up by a live band. He said he was signed by the artistes’ management company recently adding that he is working on an album that is due to be released soon. “Sapphire Rock which specialises in the management of brands, corporates, creative artistes and lifestyle individuals had been in search of talent, especially from Bulawayo that they could manage so I was fortunate to have been selected after we agreed on the terms. I’m now pushing my solo career with their help which is exciting.” De Lukes however, said pushing a solo career does not mean he will be leaving Ngoma Ingoma. “I’m still part of Ngoma Ingoma and Band Fusion. I’m working on my debut album to be launched soon and I’m excited as I can’t wait for everyone to have a listen and witness the amazing journey I’ve embarked on,” De Lukes said. “The music I do is a reflection of who I am and when I’m on stage, I’m possibly the best version of myself.” De Lukes exhibited a serious interest in the arts from a tender age and it was not long before he settled on music as his chosen art form. His decision seems to have paid off as he has performed at several venues and festivals leading to his growth in the music industry. “My electric performances got me an invite to the Jozi Book Fair in 2015 where I performed alongside Harmonic Rhythms. I’ve also serenaded big crowds at leading local festivals such as Intwasa Festival koBulawayo, Ibumba Festival, Harare International Festival of arts, Karibu Music Festival (Tanzania) and Watana Festival (Mozambique). “This exposure and the experience of sharing the stage with Africa’s finest musicians has uniquely positioned me as an artiste of note,” he said. De Lukes who got married at a colourful wedding late last year said he hopes to use his influence as a musician to help solve people’s social problems through social commentary. – @mthabisi_mthire