The Chronicle A billionaire’s private SpaceX flight filled its two remaining seats yesterday with a scientist-teacher and a data engineer whose college friend actually won a spot but gave him the prize. The new passengers both live in the United States: Sian Proctor, a community college educator in Tempe, Arizona, and Chris Sembroski, a former Air Force missileman from Everett, Washington. They will join flight sponsor Jared Isaacman and another passenger for three days in orbit this fall. Isaacman also revealed some details about his Inspiration4 mission, as the four gathered Tuesday at NASA’s Kennedy Space Center. He’s head of Shift4 Payments, a credit card-processing company in Allentown, Pennsylvania, and is paying for what would be SpaceX’s first private flight while raising money for St Jude Children’s Research Hospital in Memphis, Tennessee. Their SpaceX Dragon capsule will launch no earlier than mid-September, aiming for an altitude of 540km (335 miles). That’s 120km (75 miles) higher than the International Space Station and on a level with the Hubble Space Telescope. Isaacman, 38, a pilot who will serve as spacecraft commander, still won’t say how much he’s paying. He’s donating $100m to St Jude, while donors so far have contributed $13m, primarily through the lottery that offered a chance to fly in space. Hayley Arceneaux, 29, was named to the crew a month ago. The St Jude physician assistant was treated there as a child for bone cancer. That left two capsule seats open. Proctor, 51, beat out 200 businesses and nabbed the seat reserved for a customer of Isaacman’s company. An independent panel of judges chose her space art website dubbed Space2inspire. “It was like when Harry Potter found out he was a wizard, a little bit of shock and awe,” Proctor told The Associated Press last week. “It’s like, ‘I’m the winner?’” Sembroski, 41, donated and entered the lottery but wasn’t picked in the random drawing earlier this month — his friend was. His friend declined to fly for personal reasons and offered the spot to Sembroski, who worked as a Space Camp counsellor in college and volunteered for space advocacy groups. “Just finding out that I’m going to space was an incredible, strange, surreal event,” he said. Proctor, who studied geology, applied three times to NASA’s astronaut corps, coming close in 2009, and took part in simulated Mars missions in Hawaii. She was born in Guam, where her late father — a “Hidden Figure” in her mind — worked at NASA’s tracking station for the Apollo moonshots, including those of Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin.-Al Jazeera.