The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief A senior Government official in the then Ministry of Local Government, Public Works and National Housing from the Midlands province has been arrested for criminal abuse of office after she allegedly allocated people land in a wetland in Ascot Extension suburb in Gweru. Matilda Manhambo who is based in Gweru was arrested by the police working with the Special Anti-Corruption Unit (Sacu) in connection with the Uchena Land Commission Report, which alleges criminal abuse of office by the 63-year-old when she was the housing officer or projects coordinator in the department of Public Works in the Midlands province. Manhando appeared yesterday before Gweru Regional Magistrate Mrs Phathekile Msipa facing allegations of criminal abuse of duty as a public officer.She was not asked to plead.Mrs. Msipa remanded her in custody to tomorrow for bail application. Prosecutor Mr Talent Tadenyika told the court that sometime between 2011 and 2015, the Government allegedly had a project called Hlalani Khuhle/ Garikai at Ascot Extension suburb in the city of Gweru. Mr. Tadenyika told the court that Manhambo- a former housing officer or projects coordinator in the department of Public Works and National Housing, Midlands province was then nominated to be the project coordinator responsible for administration, monitoring and allocation of residential stands. The court heard that during the course of her duties, Manhambo allegedly connived with one Mukanga who is still at large illegally sold 16 stands in Ascot Extension to unsuspecting beneficiaries and pocketed the money. The court heard that Manhambo allegedly created a further 379 stands by altering an approved plan layout plan number ML80.“The accused person fitted the stands in open spaces, wetlands and reserved space land without authority from the Minister responsible for local governance. The accused person would then give an offer letter to beneficiaries which can be produced in court as exhibits,” said Mr Tadenyika .Manhambo together with the former Midlands Governor Jason Machaya, Midlands provincial planning officer Chaisayanyerwa Chibururu also have another pending case involving stands.They are jointly charged with former Midlands and Mashonaland West provincial development coordinator Cecilia Chitiyo, former Gweru District Administrator Shepherd Marweyi, Sifelani Moyo (59), Ethel Mlalazi (65) and Everest Nyamadzawo (33) facing allegations of illegally allocating State land in Gweru, Zvishavane and Gokwe.Machaya on this matter is out on $1 000 bail while the rest are out on $200 bail each.They all pleaded not guilty to the charges. In September last year, Machaya and Chibururu were each sentenced to 48 months imprisonment for unlawfully allocating 17 799 stands to land developers in Gokwe town, who in turn gave them 1 000 stands worth US$900 000 which was computed as ZW$900 000.The court ruled against an application by the State for the accused persons to pay restitution of 1 000 stands to Gokwe town, saying they had benefited nothing from the criminal abuse of office charges. 