The Chronicle Langalakhe Mabena
South Africa-based music producer and DJ, Zwesta SA (real name Zwelihle Mathe) has landed a deejaying gig on two of Mzansi’s most popular radio stations, Ukhozi FM and Metro FM. Both stations are owned by the South Africa Broadcasting Corporation. As part of the deal, the Nketa-bred producer will be a residential DJ at Ukhozi FM for the month of March where he will work closely with the station’s anchors, Mzokoloko and Mroza on the afternoon drive time show, Sisonke Mix. Sisonke Mix airs on Wednesdays at 3PM. On Metro FM, he will feature on the famous afternoon Kings Drive show which is hosted by the award-winning Kings of the Weekend duo of DJs Spectacular and Naves. The prime time show which has a large audience will be on March 22 at 5.40PM. DJ Zwesta SA is the name behind hit tracks — We Rise featuring Yasirah Bhelz, Rafiki featuring Nkwali and Lashona Ilanga featuring Miss Twaggy, all which have received heavy rotation on radio stations in South Africa and Zimbabwe. Speaking from his base in East London, DJ Zwesta SA said he believes his latest song, Uzobuya which features Tomie is the one that landed him both opportunities. He described the achievement as a “win” much bigger than a physical award. “I was offered the Ukhozi FM gig after having submitted my new song, Uzobuya which undoubtedly took national (South Africa) radio stations by storm on its release last month. On its first week of release, the song moved from position 990 to 36 on the South African radio stations monitoring system, something I believe charmed the team at Ukhozi FM,” said Zwesta SA. The DJ paid homage to DJ Spectacular for honouring him with the Metro FM slot. “Metro FM is one of the best radio stations in Mzansi and it’s a blessing to feature on one of their programmes. I appreciate the gesture and the opportunity I was given by Spectacular. He’s one guy who believed in my music.” Meanwhile, Zwesta SA has said he will be releasing his debut album in September. Zimbabwean Afro-fusion singer Otis Ngwabi, Miss Twaggy, Tomie and Nkwali are some of the artistes who are likely to feature on this production. — @langamabena.