The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
It was worth the wait! Uyavuma, the latest album by Martin “The Big Boss” Sibanda which was released on Friday after about five years is a quality product that will undoubtedly cement the musician’s top position in Rhumba music. The album, produced at TK studios was well done with The Big Boss’ prowess on vocals remaining unmatched. However, what is more outstanding and refreshing on this album is the instruments as they are fresh. Anyone with an ear for good music will pick them out. Ndolwane Super Sounds Music is known for the meaningful messages as well as good guitars which complement the music and this was achieved on this album with perfection. Unlike other Rhumba artistes whose beat is fast, Ndolwane music is a bit laid back which allows the delivery of its powerful messages. Uyavuma which has seven tracks and a bonus, Bolingo Ya Mama, a single which was released in December last year, features a remix of the red hot Baphindile from the Bakhuzeni album. The title track confronts the challenges brought by religion in the observance of tradition and culture. In the song, the musician says Africans must not abandon their cultures and traditions. On Ndombukumbudza, one of the two Kalanga tracks on the album, The Big Boss reminds people in the diaspora not to forget home where they left families in poverty. On Amanxeba, Martin pours out his emotions and pain on the death of the Abson Ndebele who was the glue that held Ndolwane Super Sounds. It is clear in the song that The Big Boss misses the days when the group was united and dishing out hits. The song, one of the best in the album, will have anyone who has lost a relative, relating to it. Track number four, Bakhohlisene, talks about wrong things done by people due to peer pressure. The musician counsels people who want to be rich through unconventional ways to, instead, focus on working hard and praying. Simba Zwele advises people not to laugh at those going all out to raise and invest in their children with the hope that they will return the favour and give their parents a good life. Commenting on the album’s release, Lucky Moyo, one of The Big Boss’s handlers said the album sales are encouraging thus far while urging fans to buy original copies. “So far so good. We’re selling the album and the first days have been encouraging. We continue to urge fans to buy original music to support our artistes,” Moyo said.