The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
A SENIOR Government official in the then Ministry of Local Government, Public Works and National Housing from the Midlands province who allegedly allocated people land in a wetland in Ascot Extension in Gweru, has been arrested for criminal abuse of office. Matilda Manhambo (63) who was housing officer in the department of Public Works, was arrested by police working with the Special Anti-Corruption Unit (Sacu). Yesterday Manhambo appeared before Gweru regional magistrate Mrs Phathekile Msipa facing allegations of criminal abuse of office. She was not asked to plead and was remanded in custody to tomorrow for bail application. Prosecutor Mr Talent Tadenyika told the court that sometime between 2011 and 2015, the Government had a project called Hlalani Kuhle/ Garikai at Ascot Extension suburb in the city of Gweru. Mr Tadenyika told the court that Manhambo was appointed project co-ordinator responsible for administration, monitoring and allocation of residential stands. The court heard that during the course of her duties, Manhambo allegedly connived with one Mukanga who is still at large and illegally sold 16 stands in Ascot Extension to unsuspecting beneficiaries and pocketed the money. The court heard that Manhambo allegedly created a further 379 stands by altering an approved layout plan number ML80. “The accused person fitted the stands in open spaces, wetlands and reserved spaces without authority from the Minister of Local Government. The accused person then gave offer letters to beneficiaries,” said Mr Tadenyika. Manhambo together with the former Midlands Governor Jason Machaya, Midlands provincial planning officer Chaisayanyerwa Chibururu also have another pending case involving stands. They are jointly charged with former Midlands and Mashonaland West provincial development co-ordinator Cecilia Chitiyo, former Gweru District Administrator Shepherd Marweyi, Sifelani Moyo (59), Ethel Mlalazi (65) and Everest Nyamadzawo (33) for illegally allocating State land in Gweru, Zvishavane and Gokwe. Machaya on this matter is out on $1 000 bail while the rest are out on $200 bail each. They all pleaded not guilty to the charges. In September last year, Machaya and Chibururu were each sentenced to 48 months imprisonment for unlawfully allocating 17 799 stands to land developers in Gokwe town who in turn gave them 1 000 stands worth US$900 000.