The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Chronicle Reporter
VETERAN nationalist Cde Jane Lungile Ngwenya has paid tribute to women in the country for being resilient against all forces they have faced since the days of the liberation struggle. Cde Ngwenya said she attended some of the conferences which sought to advance women’s empowerment around the world which gave birth to the International Women’s Day. She was speaking after receiving a grocery donation from transporter Marble Luxury Coaches which services the Bulawayo-Harare Route. The hamper contained rice, cooking oil, sugar, mealie-meal and toiletries among others. “Women in Zimbabwe are very strong. They are working under very difficult positions ezamadoda. Men are cruel to them but they have persevered and am very proud of that. Even in the face of Covid-19 women are stronger making sure that families survive. They are even standing up to speak for themselves after being oppressed for so long from colonial times and even now when we have our own Government some men refuse women as leaders,” she said. Cde Ngwenya said she hopes that one day the country will have a female president as women are good leaders. “I am praying for a day the president of this country will be a woman. Even if I won’t be there my spirit will be very proud. Women are builders in many respects,” she said. Cde Ngwenya said there is a need to support women in the country so that there are more women in leadership positions because women do well in positions of leadership. Turning to the donation, Cde Ngwenya thanked the bus company for thinking about her as Covid-19 has compounded problems for many people. “Thank you so much for the wonderful gesture. You are saying you just started this bus business let me give you advise. Business succeeds when it is supported by people and when people support you, they do it through your own behaviour ukuthi libaphatha njani. Our President and Government are working so that people live a good life. He just commissioned new Zupco buses and is making efforts to solve the people’s problems,” she said. Cde Ngwenya called for customer care and love from bus service providers and an end of exploitation of workers. “As private players, you are supporting the Government but give the service in the proper way. Some people start businesses to exploit their own people. When you give a service, give it with a smile and not a pretended smile. It is the community that will make your business grow. Public relations is highly important in a business,” she said. Mr Tichaona Mapuranga, the director for Marble Luxury Coaches said they thought of honouring Cde Ngwenya as she did a lot for the liberation of the country. “We are a new company that just launched the Bulawayo-Harare routes and as a way of honouring women on International Women’s Day we thought it wise to come and visit ugogo. We honour not only our customers but the society where they come from and those who will use our services will attest to this,” said Mr Mapuranga. — @themkhust