The Chronicle Joel Tsvakwi, Showbiz Correspondent
TSHIBILIKA artiste, Prefect Mvundla aka Khudu who has always wished to, one day, perform at the City Hall in Bulawayo, is saddened as his hopes have been shattered by the Covid-19 pandemic which put most arts activities on halt for the past year. According to Khudu who is the leader of Tsheba Boys, Abafana Baka Jiyane troupe, performing at that venue completes an artiste as it is one of the main venues in the country’s arts hub. “My hope has been to perform at the Large City Hall to thank my fans for supporting me and making my album, Iganga Yi Answer a success. But now, due to Covid-19 induced lockdowns, this remains a dream as the plans have gone in vain,” said a disheartened Khudu. Other than fulfilling his dream, Khudu said by staging a show at the venue, he also wanted to promote the Tshibilika genre. “Also, we wanted to have the Tsholotsho type of Tshibilika on the grand stage but sadly, this plan has been taken away by the pandemic.” Not letting the pandemic derail all his plans, Khudu has defied odds and taken advantage of the ongoing lockdown to perfect his styles for a music video he is planning on shooting. “We decided to take advantage of the lockdown by conducting rehearsals. This has improved my script for the upcoming video of a song on the Iganga Yi Answer album,” he said. Off music, Khudu has joined the likes of Martin Sibanda and Madlela Sikhobokobo in coming up with a business to support his career. He has come up with a clothing line named Tsheba Boys. “I’m working on my clothing label which I named Tsheba Boys. The apparel which is already on the market is being well received by Tshibilika fans and other fashion-savvy people,” said Khudu. The clothing line comprises sun hats, t-shirts, jackets and masks. Through this brand, Khudu said he hopes to promote the Tshibilika genre as well as his brand. To give back to the Tsholotsho community, Khudu said he is working on organising a consignment of masks which will be donated to communities in the district. “While things are difficult for the music industry due to the suspension of gigs which is our major source of revenue, as artists we need to think of other ways to sustain our operations. “We still have social responsibilities so we as Tsheba Boys band we’d want to distribute masks and some Personal Protective Clothing to help our community,” he said. -@joelTsvakwi