The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Gwanda Reporter
JOSHUA Mqabuko Nkomo Polytechnic (JMN Poly) in Gwanda, Matabeleland South Province, has imposed a fine on students who violate Covid-19 regulations. The institution reopened for face-to-face lectures two weeks ago. A number of students stay on campus and unnecessary movements, in and out of campus are not allowed. Inside the campus everyone is expected to properly wear their masks and sanitise regularly. Those who do not properly wear their masks are expected to fork out a fine of US$5 or $500 which will be directed towards the institution’s developmental programmes. Failure to pay the fine will result in the accused students not being allowed to attend lectures. This was revealed by JMN Poly principal Dr Ngoni Moyo during a memorial service on Wednesday for the institution’s two lecturers who succumbed to Covid-19. Mr Adonija Chauke, a lecturer for computer science died on February 15, while Miss Vongai Chigiya, a home economics lecturer died on December 21 last year. Dr Moyo passed her condolences message to the family of the deceased and urged everyone to take the deadly pandemic seriously. “As a college we have gone through a rough road and many have been feeling guilty for not burying, we need to come and cry together when a disaster hits us and let me remind you that we are not here to mourn but we are here to remember our fellow colleagues. “Please be guided accordingly that we need to fight the pandemic as one and in that light the college has introduced a fine of US$5 or RTGS$500 to those who violate Covid-19 guidelines and protocols set by the World Health Organisation (WHO),” said Dr Moyo. Mrs Sicolisiwe Chisango who is the chairperson for peer educators emphasised the importance of personal hygiene and gave health tips on prevention measures against the Covid-19. “Covid-19 is real and we should stay safe by washing our hands regularly with soap and running water in case there is no sanitiser one must carry a small soap to use at any tap. “People should wear their face masks at all times and avoid crowded places, maintain social distancing in queues, classrooms and we should also continue practising these measures even outside the school premises,” she said. — @mthabisi_mthire