The Chronicle Judge Jarachara, Chronicle Reporter AN association made up of people who grew up in Emakhandeni suburb, Bulawayo has come to the rescue of an elderly woman who has been surviving on lemon juice in recent days. Covid-19 has depressed economies worldwide and vulnerable groups like the elderly have been among the hardest hit. The association- an impromptu group that met on WhatsApp- yesterday donated food hampers to 54 elderly people in the suburb. Each received a 10kg packet of mealie meal, 2kgs of sugar, 2kgs of salt, 2 litres cooking oil and 500grams of beans among other groceries. Among the beneficiaries was Ms Judy Ncube (78). The group representative Mr Bekezela Ngoma of Emakhandeni suburb found the old woman boiling lemons for supper on Thursday as she and her sister Ms Judith Ncube (65) had nothing to eat. Mr Ngoma who was moved by the situation decided to take the elderly sisters on board for the donation. Judy is Hypertensive and Asthmatic. The sisters’ house which is semi-finished and shows the sky from the inside adds to their plight as they no longer pay rates due to incapacitation. Speaking during the donation, A tearful Judy thanked Mr Ngoma and the association for giving her food on Thursday and including her in the donation yesterday. In tears she prayed for blessings for Mr Ngoma and his wife. “I pray that Mr Ngoma and your wife be blessed for your Thursday gesture. you could not eat knowing that the old woman has eaten nothing, may God bless you,” she said. “Up to this age I have never seen anything like this. People taking care for others? working for the purpose of feeding others who are not their relatives? this is wonderful and I am grateful for that,” said Judy. She appealed for help from members of the public who may be able to join hands with her children in looking after her and her sister. She said her two children are also looking after 12 other children who were orphaned when their three other siblings died. Ms Ncube needs inhalers and said she last used one last year. Tablets for High Blood Pressure and Asthma are another problem she is facing. She sobbed as she continued to thank the donors who reminded her that there is something called tea and eating to satisfaction. “Talking about food is a luxury to us here at home. I am a patient of Asthma and BP. I need An Inhaler my children cannot afford as they are looking after their departed siblings’ children. Food and tablets are my other headache. I appeal to the people of Zimbabwe who may be interested in helping me,” she said. Another beneficiary Mr Oliver Mpofu thanked the donors as well. “It is today that I have realised there is power in unity and togetherness. These children have taught us the elders that had we done this long back, the situation today would not be the same,” he said. Mr Ngoma said the group aimed at rescuing their parents in the area during the first lockdown and the gesture has grown to benefit more than 50 people. “This group is made up of people who were born and bred here in the suburb. We came out with the plan to rescue these people who are locked down and are no longer able to fend for themselves. Since the beginning of the programme last year, more than 50 people have benefited and we are grateful to all those who are involved in the exercise. All I can say for now is, we have started a good