The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
CHIEF Shana of Jambezi just outside Victoria Falls has expressed concern over the rate at which villagers are selling fresh farm produce from their fields, saying they risk starvation in the midst of plenty. Scores of farmers especially from Matetsi, Breakfast, Lubangwe under Chief Shana as well as Masue and Woodlands under Chief Mvuthu have been flooding Victoria Falls to sell fresh farm produce. They sell green mealies, pumpkin leaves, okra, sweet reeds and other items which they get from their fields. The charge US$1 for six maize cobs and US$0,50 cents for a bunch of pumpkin leaves. Some travel to Victoria Falls on a daily basis to sell while others display at Victoria Falls International Airport, Mispah, Ndlovu, Matetsi and Lubangwe turn offs along the Hwange-Victoria Falls road to sell to travellers. They have brisk business in the absence of Zambian hawkers commonly known as omzanga who used to cross the border to Victoria Falls to sell goods before lockdown. Chief Shana said he was worried that some might sell everything from their fields and starve during the dry season. He said people should be reminded that while the 2020-2021 rainy season had been good, the country suffered recurrent droughts over the years which caused food shortages. “We are happy that God smiled at us this year and gave us good rains. However, I am worried that people are selling fresh produce from their fields. “I am going to call all village heads so they spread the word for people to be mindful of drought,” said Chief Shana. Chief Shana urged people to allow their crops to dry so they harvest and store for use throughout the year. “People should remember that over the years we have been suffering serious droughts because of lack of rains. “We cannot make a mistake when we got such good rains by selling everything. We cannot be depending on donors every year, yes we need donors but we should be able to sustain ourselves,” he said. Chief Shana said this year’s good rains are an opportunity for communities to revive Isiphala SeNkosi whose idea is to retain value in agriculture by storing grain which will in turn be used for vulnerable members of the society in respective chiefdoms. Farmers however said they were mindful of how much they sell. “My first crop is already dry hence I cannot be afraid of starving. I am only selling few cobs to get money for day to day upkeep of my family,” said Ms Janet Sibanda from Masue. Ms Martha Muleya from Matetsi said selling some fresh mealies will not affect her yield and she is expecting a bumper harvest from a five-hectare field she planted. Over the years, farmers have been struggling to control quelea birds which destroy especially millet and sorghum. This year the migratory birds have not started causing havoc.-@ncubeleon