The Chronicle Business Reporter
DELTA Corporation has appointed Mr Matlhogonolo Valela as the new chief executive officer taking over from Mr Pearson Gowero who is retiring in June this year after serving the company for nearly 25 years. The beverages producer said the appointment of Mr Valela who was the group’s finance director, was with effect from July 1. It said the company secretary and group treasurer, Mr Alex Makamure has been appointed as the group finance director with effect from 1 April. “Mr Gowero steps down on retirement as chief executive officer and director of the company on 30 June 2021, drawing to a close a distinguished career with the group spanning nearly 25 years. Mr Gowero was appointed as the chief executive officer in June 2012, having joined the group in March 1997,” said Delta. It said Mr Gowero started at Chibuku Breweries in marketing and rose to become the divisional managing director and was appointed to the Delta board in 2003 as executive director responsible for the beverages business sales and distribution operations. Mr Gowero was seconded to SABMiller Africa in 2006 where he served as managing director of Zambian Breweries Group until his return to Delta as chief operating officer in 2011. Delta said Mr Valela who replaces Mr Gowero has been the group finance director since July 2011. “Mr Valela has been appointed as chief executive officer with effect from 1 July 2021. Mr Valela has been the group finance director since July 2011. “He will immediately assume the role of chief operating officer,” said the company. Mr Valela joined the group in December 1996 and has occupied various roles of increasing seniority in operational finance and accounting, becoming the group treasurer in 2003. He is a chartered accountant who served articles with Schmulian & Sibanda Chartered Accountants and holds a Bachelor of Technology Accountancy degree from the University of Zimbabwe. He has participated in leadership and executive development programmes run by leading global institutions. “The board congratulates Mr Valela on his appointment and is confident that he will leverage his wealth of knowledge, strategic insights and passion to drive business growth,” said Delta. The beverages manufacturing concern said Mr Makamure who has been appointed group finance director has been with Delta since 1998.
“Alex is currently the company secretary and group treasurer with functional responsibility for corporate affairs and supply chain.”