The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
THE ongoing #GirlPowerZw project has been an adventure and learning curve that has brought unity for four young women who have been painting murals of female icons around Bulawayo since last week. They have been painting the murals as a way to celebrate Women’s Month. Murals of iconic singer Busi Ncube, award-winning musician Berita Khumalo, actor and television personality Mbo Mahocs, veteran modelling guru Sarah Mpofu, dancer-cum-singer Sandra Ndebele, ZITF marketing and public relations manager Stella Nkomo and activist Soneni Gwizi have been painted around Bulawayo thus far. The four painters responsible for this project in Bulawayo are working on the murals from morning till mid-afternoon alongside the runners of the project, CaliGraph founders – Nyasha Jeche from Harare and Marcus Zvinavashe from Bulawayo. Three of them are students from Chinhoyi University of Technology; Wadzanai “Ceven” Rukweza, Melisa “Melz” Gumbo and Petronella “Petty Latty” Charlie who are studying towards a Bachelor of Science in Visual Communication and Multimedia Design degree. The fourth, Nonhlanhla Blessing Sibanda, who calls herself Spanchi Omnyama is an 18-year-old first-timer in painting as she just walked up to the artists and asked to join them. Talented person she is as she is also an actor in the drama series Indlalifa: The Heir and a poet. Sharing how she got to be part of the project, Spanchi Omnyama said: “I was intrigued by the paintings so I got closer to the action and found myself working with CaliGraph in no time. These beautiful women are my sisters now. “I always thought painting was hard as I felt that it was a thing only guys could do. So, I’m glad to say I’m testimony that women can do many other things not just specialise in the kitchen as we’ve been stereotyped.” The inquisitive Spanchi Omnyama said painting for her, was a form of therapy. “Painting is therapeutic. While you are concentrating, you are alone. There can be a time where we are playing around and interacting, but there comes a time for people to be quiet and work. Be spending a lot of time alone while painting, you get to know yourself much better,” she said. Petty Latty (21) said she has so far, enjoyed every day she has been in the scorching heat painting the city’s female icons as it has been worth it. “It’s been quite an adventure. Coming down to Bulawayo, learning the city’s culture and embracing the people’s love has been overwhelming. Doing this is an honour because we aren’t only celebrating women out there, but us as female visual artistes. There’re not so many female visual artistes in the country so by taking up such roles, we want to provoke and encourage them,” said Petty Latty. She said during their painting in Nkulumane, they met women who were surprised to see them paint as they thought this art form was a preserve of the boy child. “When we were painting these murals in Nkulumane, we met women who were surprised to see us painting. They told us they thought these art things were for the male child. So provoking their feelings as mothers and them seeing us like their daughters painting other women was an honour. “Through these murals, we are celebrating visual artistes out there and women who challenged stereotypes. It starts with you and the community, hence why we’re moving around painting in locations such as Nkulumane, New Lobengula and Makokoba. “It’s all because these women we are celebrating came out of these locations. People can make it in life no matter their background,” said Petty Latty. Melz (24) said she hopes to inspire young girls to push and break boundaries like the icons they are painting. “We’re painting icons from here. So, when a girl sees Mbo Mahocs or Berita, they’ll be inspired to be like them or achieve more than them. This experience has taught me all about teamwork and to be loving. I appreciate all the ladies I’m working with and all the ladies that we are painting. They inspire us and we love them,” said Melz. Through the paintings, Melz said they are empowering other young ladies out there to follow their dreams and do what they want to do. “We want to create conversations among family setups that if a girl child wants to be a musician or anything, instead of discouraging them, they should be encouraged to pursue their dreams. “That’s why we’re putting the murals of these women, because if you see Sandra Ndebele, you’ll be like she managed to do this and that, hence I want to be a singer, maybe I can be more than that,” she said. Ceven (23) said by working on the paintings, she has been challenged to be a better person. “Working on this project has been an honour and it has transformed me. I told myself I can do and achieve anything. No matter how big the challenge is, I can overcome it. Painting women who have made it and are challenging us and the community at large is humbling,” said Ceven.