The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
FORMER Highlanders juniors’ coaches Gift Lunga (junior), Siza Khoza and Dan Ngwenya could retrace their footsteps to the club, after meeting club chairman Kenneth Mhlophe on Monday. Thebe, as Lunga is affectionately known, resigned from his Bosso Under-18 coaching role to take up a “more challenging” post as head coach of Victoria Falls-based Mosi Rovers in 2019. Khoza and Ngwenya stepped down as the Under-16 and Under-14 coaches at the beginning of 2020, and were linked to ambitious Zifa Bulawayo Province Division Two side Nabals. However, due to no football activity caused by the Covid-19 lockdown, they couldn’t execute their duties and their contracts ran out at the end of December, 2020. The trio confirmed the “talks” with Mhlophe and said the ball was now in Highlanders’ court. Lunga, who won four championships with Highlanders before joining Caps United in 2005, had been drafted into Bulawayo City FC’s technical team last year and is also a member of the Real Betis (Zimbabwe) coaching staff, said he is ready to have another dance with the club that groomed him. “When I left the club, I left with its blessings, as I wanted to grow as a coach and enhance my CV. I had a good stay in Victoria Falls and coaching in the First Division added another dimension into my coaching career. My love for junior football development has always been clear and I believe with the experience I got at Mosi Rovers and Bulawayo City where I worked before Covid-19 stopped activities comes in handy as I look at a possible return to Highlanders,” said Lunga. “We spoke to the chairman (Mhlophe) and I made it known to him that there won’t be a conflict of interest even if I return to the club because at Real Betis we have periodic camps whereby a number of junior players from across the country come to train and get a shot at attracting scouts.” Khoza, a lively winger during his heydays at Highlanders, left the club after waiting long for a contract renewal until Nabals came with an offer. “At the time I left last year I said I held no hard feelings as one day I might return and I hope they (Highlanders management) were not cross with the decision I took. Yes, we met the chairman with the other guys and I must say it was a fruitful meeting. I’m always ready to be of service to Highlanders,” Khoza said. Ngwenya, who had been with the juniors since 2011 and coached players such as Lawrence Mhlanga and Teenage Hadebe, among others that have gone on to shine at senior club and national team level, said he is looking forward to returning.
“Things happen in life and moves that we make are part of what happens in football. I don’t want to dwell much about the past, but rather what the future has in store. Highlanders has always been known for having a vibrant junior policy and being part of that history is an honour for any coach, and I’m not different,” said Ngwenya. Mhlophe said discussions on development coaches have been happening behind the scenes. “I met the former development coaches and we held a fruitful meeting. The club’s backbone has always been our juniors and we have been looking at filling those positions. We will have further discussions as an executive and conclude this matter as we anticipate football resumption,” said Mhlophe. – @ZililoR