The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
WARRIORS coach Zdravko Logarušic will not be making any additions to his squad despite the absence of the British-based contingent for their crucial Afcon qualifiers at the end of this month. The Croat called up an enlarged squad of 38 players for the penultimate Afcon qualifiers against Botswana in Gaborone on March 25 and a home tie against Zambia at the National Sports Stadium four days later. The bloated squad has seven players from local clubs, with the rest plying their trade outside the country. Warriors manager Wellington Mpandare said even though midfield enforcer Marvelous Nakamba was the only officially confirmed player not coming for the two encounters, they were now living with the reality that none of the British-based players will make the trip. “Aston Villa confirmed Nakamba is not coming, Wigan Athletic wants Tendayi Darikwa to come, but the 10-day quarantine is the stumbling block, Bournemouth (home to Jordan Zemura) said they will come back to us and there’s no response from the others so, chances of having UK-based players are slim,” said Mpandare. He said there were enough numbers in camp not to warrant any additions unless something drastic happens. “We have enough numbers so I don’t see any additions unless something comes up,” said the Warriors manager. With Nakamba’s absence, France-based Marshall Munetsi is the odds on favourite for the holding midfield role, with the other options being Zesco United’s tried and trusted veteran Thabani Kamusoko. Meanwhile, locally based players will report for camp on March 12, with others joining camp on March 21 and the last batch expected on March 23 ahead of departure for Gaborone the following day, 24 hours before match day.
In-form hitman Tino Kadewere will be the last Warrior to report for camp. He has a game on March 21 and will leave the following day, arriving in Zimbabwe on March 23.
Warriors 38 men squad Goalkeepers: Talbert Shumba (Nkana), Tatenda Mkuruva (Michigan Stars), Ariel Sibanda (Highlanders), Martin Mapisa (Zamora CF) Defenders: Jordan Zemura (AFC Bournemouth), Jimmy Dzingai (Nkana), Alec Mudimu (Ankaraspor), Teenage Hadebe (Yeni Malatyaspor), Divine Lunga (Lamontville Golden Arrows), Tendai Jirira (Detroit City), Tendayi Darikwa (Wigan Athletic), Brendan Galloway (Luton Town), Victor Kamhuka (Royal Malaysia Police), Romario Matova (NK Solin), Peter Muduwa (Simba SC), Carlos Mavhurume (Caps United), Shadreck Nyahwa (Bulawayo Chiefs). Midfielders: Marshall Munetsi (Stade de Reims), Marvelous Nakamba (Aston Villa), Butholezwe Ncube (Amazulu), Ovidy Karuru (Black Leopards), Khama Billiat (Kaizer Chiefs), Tafadzwa Rusike (Zesco United), Brian Banda (FC Platinum), King Nadolo (Dynamos), Kudakwashe Mahachi (SuperSport United), Thabani Kamusoko (Zesco United), Knowledge Musona (KAS Eupen), Tatenda Tavengwa (Harare City), Tanaka Chinyahara (Red Arrows).
Strikers: Terrence Dzvukamanja (Orlando Pirates), Tinotenda Kadewere (Olympique Lyonnais), David Moyo (Hamilton Academical), Admiral Muskwe (Wycombe
Wanderers), Farau Matare (Bulawayo Chiefs), Knox Mutizwa (Lamontville Golden Arrows)