The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
LEGENDARY poet, Lerato “Nqindi” Ndlovu will tomorrow headline the virtual World Poetry Day celebrations taking place in Matabeleland South. The day is celebrated annually on March 21 with the belated local event set to be shown on the National Arts Council of Zimbabwe Matabeleland South updates Facebook page. The poets that will share the stage with the revered poet from Gwanda known for his exquisite clan chants are Nobuhle Blaze Moyo, Ntuthuko Okamabulala Nyathi, Mpofu Perfect Patimile, Thembani Echoes Maseko, Precious Siphithiphithi Ncube and Xolile Thwala. Dickens Mathe will be the MC. Matabeleland South provincial arts manager, Percy Vela said preparations for the event are at an advanced stage. “Preparations are at an advanced stage and the poets are eager to entertain their audience and the guest of honour will be NACZ assistant director Barbra Kotora. “The day is being celebrated online as part of efforts to encourage artistes to adapt to the new normal,” he said. Vela said as an arts institution, they will continue to avail opportunities to young artistes in order for them to make a breakthrough. Through World Poetry Day, Unesco recognises the unique ability of poetry to capture the creative spirit of the human mind. A decision to proclaim March 21 as World Poetry Day was adopted during Unesco’s 30th session held in Paris in 1999. One of the main objectives of the day is to support linguistic diversity through poetic expression and to offer endangered languages the opportunity to be heard within their communities. The observance of World Poetry Day is also meant to encourage a return to the oral tradition of poetry recitals, to promote the teaching of poetry, to restore a dialogue between poetry and other arts such as theatre, dance, music and painting. It is also meant to support small publishers and create an attractive image of poetry in the media so that the art of poetry will no longer be considered an outdated form of art, but one which enables society as a whole to regain and assert its identity. — @mthabisi_mthire.