The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
YOUTHS have been challenged to invest in agriculture thereby contributing to the enhancement of the country’s food security. Zimbabwe like the rest of the Sadc region received above normal rainfall this year and farmers are expecting a bumper harvest. Government introduced the Intwasa/ Pfumvudza conservation farming which farmers, both small and large scale have commended for contributing to a good crop especially for maize. Farmers in Masue, Woodlands, Matetsi, Breakfast and Lubangwe, which are Hwange District’s breadbasket, expect good harvest this cropping season. The farmers in Masue and Lubangwe are however, concerned about elephants that are straying into fields and destroying crops. One of Masue farmers Mr Matthew Muleya who is also Zanu-PF Hwange District Development Co-ordinating Committee chair encouraged youths to take farming seriously. Mr Muleya planted six hectares of maize using the Intwasa/ Pfumvudza model and it is almost ready for harvesting. “My advice to youth is that they should not only expect to get employed but should venture into farming. We want to encourage them to take advantage of land available in their areas and invest in agriculture because it is a way of empowering themselves. Government is conducting land audits countrywide and youths should start positioning themselves to benefit from whatever land will be re-allocated,” he said. Mr Muleya said every citizen has a duty to contribute to the country’s food security. “My maize crop is almost ready for harvesting and I am expecting a bumper harvest. I also planted pumpkins, cucumbers, okra and cow peas. Last year I planted 3,5 ha of maize which did well and I donated the bulk of it to the needy in our district,” said Mr Muleya. He said communities can also enhance production by investing in irrigation infrastructure. Mr Muleya said ZimParks rangers have been on the ground helping communities to protect crops and livestock by driving away wild animals. In Masue, Igusu Safaris erected an electric fence on the western end of the community to prevent elephants from straying into villages. However, the elephants have been targeting un-electrified gates which they have been breaking to gain entry into human settlements. Another Masue farmer Mr Christopher Ndlovu who is owner of Dadani Secondary School in Victoria Falls, said he planted four ha of maize under Intwasa/Pfumvudza. One of the plots was unfortunately destroyed by elephants last week. “I am expecting a good harvest on the remaining plots. I must acknowledge that gatshompo (conservation farming) is a good method because the maize crop did well. I also planted sorghum, millet and sunflower and we commend Government for introducing Intwasa. I will be able to send some grain to the Grain Marketing Board and also sustain my other livestock and poultry projects. It is our duty to contribute to the country’s food security,” said Mr Ndlovu. In Lubangwe some farmers have reportedly lost all their crops and the community has appealed to ZimParks to help drive away elephants. — @ncubeleon.