The Chronicle SLOWLY but surely, life is going back to normal and business is already picking up pace. Schools will open for all classes tomorrow, in a new setup whereby some pupils will attend school for only two days per week to limit numbers as per the Standard Operating Procedures (SOP). According to the SOP, classes must not have more than 35 pupils. Responding to questions from Sunday News, director of communications and advocacy in the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education, Mr Taungana Ndoro said alternating and hot sitting classes will depend on each individual school’s capacity. “This depends on the school, some need to alternate, some don’t. Our SOPs instruct that we have not more than 35 learners per class. But the less the better. As for actual teacher establishment, let’s wait for schools to open and then we assess,” said Mr Ndoro. In a bid to further open up the economy, Minister of Finance and Economic Development Professor Mthuli Ncube announced that the country will next week receive another consignment of Covid-19 vaccines procured by Government from China. Speaking during a tour of Plumtree Border Post on Saturday, Prof Ncube said the country was expecting more doses of the vaccine from China next week to bring the total received vaccines to one million. The country has already received more than 600 000 doses of Sinopharm vaccines and has now entered the second phase of the inoculation. “The immigration department and the Zimra employees should get the vaccine because it is important to do so considering the nature of their job,” he said. Prof Ncube said Government was working on reopening the borders for both vehicular and human traffic. The good news on the opening of the borders and schools, came as the country did not record any Covid-19-related deaths on Saturday. Only 10 new Covid-19 cases were recorded. According to a statement from the Ministry of Health and Child Care, 523 frontline workers were vaccinated on Saturday, bringing the cumulative number to 42 210 countrywide. The ministry said all the 10 new cases are local transmissions. Five cases were reported in Bulawayo followed by Harare with two cases, Matabeleland South two cases while Mashonaland Central recorded one case. “There are 51 hospitalised cases, 7 asymptomatic, 31 mild to moderate, nine severe cases and four intensive care unit,” read the statement. Clearly, Covid-19 is under control in the country and this is the right time to start opening up the economy. It will, however, be paramount to continue adhering to Government regulations, SOPs and World Health Organisation guidelines to avoid a third wave of Covid-19. Government was up to the challenge brought about by this global pandemic and to win the fight once and for all, regulations must continue to be enforced. Violators must face the full wrath of the law, as the threat of the third wave of Covid-19 is real. We commend Government for the sterling job so far and managing to bring the economy back to life.