The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Chronicle Reporter
MATABELELAND North and South provinces are failing to shed off the tag of having the highest number of people practising open defecation in the country, a latest ZimVAC report has revealed. The 8th Zimbabwe Vulnerability Assessment Committee (ZimVAC) urban livelihoods assessment was this year conducted under the cloud of Covid-19 in December. The survey provides updates on pertinent urban household livelihoods issues such as demographics, housing, education, health, nutrition, WASH, energy, social protection, food consumption and strategies, Covid-19, shocks and food security. It was carried out under the overall co-ordination of the Food and Nutrition Council (FNC) with support from the Government of Zimbabwe and its Development Partners. The report which highlights the state of Water, Sanitation and hygiene in the country found that open defecation is still practised in many urban areas. “Open defecation was highest in Matabeleland North province at 6,6 percent with Matabeleland South province at 6,5 percent. Midlands follows down at 3,1 percent. Mashonaland East province is at 1,4 percent while the national stands at 1,6 percent,” read the report. Despite experiencing one of its worst water crises last year, Bulawayo is a among other provinces that include Harare and Masvingo which did not record any cases. The reports also states that nationally, 96,7 percent of the households in urban areas had access to improved sanitation facilities with Bulawayo topping in the country at 99,6 percent, Masvingo at 99,2 percent, Harare 99 percent, Midlands at 94,4 percent, Matabeleland south 92,2 percent and Matabeleland North at 89,7percent. Matabeleland North and Manicaland provinces had the highest number of households using unimproved sanitation facilities in the country. “Nationally, open defecation decreased from four percent in 2019 to two percent in 2020. No open defecation must be practised in urban areas. Unimproved facilities include pit latrines without a slab or platform, hanging latrines and bucket latrines. Nationally two percent of households were using unimproved sanitation facilities, an increase from one percent in 2019,” says the report. According to the open defecation by domain, Zvishavane urban had the highest percentage of people living in urban areas who practice open defecation in the country at 14 ,1 percent. Binga, Lupane and Nkayi are second at 12,6 percent, Beitbridge urban was at 8,2percent, Gwanda urban at 7,6 percent and Plumtree urban at 3,6 percent. The survey also looked at the households sharing a toilet and Mashonaland Central has the highest percentage at 45 percent followed by Matabeland North province at 43 percent. Matabeleland South has 38 percent, Harare 36 percent, Masvingo 33 percent, Bulawayo 24 percent and Midlands 23 percent. — @themkhust.