The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
Zimbabwean and South African security authorities have increased efforts to curb illegal activities including smuggling and border jumping through Beitbridge Border Post and numerous illegal crossing points along the Limpopo River. The police and other security agents have since the beginning of the year been implementing an operation dubbed “No to cross border crimes” which is aimed at improving the country’s capacity to collect export and import duty. South of the Limpopo River, South African Police Service (SAPS) is running another operation code-named “Thatha Zonke” (Take Everything). Scores of illegal migrants and smugglers have been arrested on both sides of the border with goods worth millions of dollars. A security source from Zimbabwe said on Friday police intercepted a commercial truck that was transporting pre-owned vehicles and had been used to smuggle 500kgs of sodium cyanide. Sodium cyanide is used commercially for fumigation, electroplating, extracting gold and silver from ores, and chemical manufacturing. “Two people have been arrested in connection with the smuggling of the cyanide and we are still pursuing the other accomplice,” said the official. South Africa’s police spokesperson for Limpopo province, Colonel Moatshe Ngoepe said a 36-year-old Zimbabwean man was arrested on Saturday for smuggling cigarettes worth R500 000. “He was arrested during a stop and search operation and a total of 1 044 cartons of illicit cigarettes to the value of R558 419 were found hidden inside the truck. The truck was also confiscated during the arrest,” said Col Ngoepe. He said police rounded up 1 984 people across the province for various offenses. The cases include possession of counterfeit cigarettes, suspected stolen motor vehicles, suspected stolen properties, drugs, dagga, rape, assault and robberies. Col Ngoepe said the suspects were expected to appear in court soon, across the province. Azori Muchirahondo (36) and Steady Lore (37), who were arrested for smuggling sodium cyanide into Zimbabwe have since appeared before Beitbridge Resident Magistrate Mr Toyindepi Zhou charged with contravening a section of the Customs and Excise Act. The suspects were both remanded to March 23.- @tupeyo