The Chronicle Perspective, Stephen Mpofu
TWENTY years on this year a Government of the people by the people who wrestled freedom and independence from the tight grip of Western imperialism remains anathema to the racists; otherwise strong pleas by the Southern African Development Community (Sadc), the African Union (AU) and the rest of the progressive world late last year for the West to end economic sanctions imposed on our motherland as punishment for the land reform programme would have seen a positive response in the new year. As things stand right now, however, the lift-sanctions call appears to have fallen on deaf ears with reports from some Zimbabweans resident in some Western capitals, and replicated by ruling party insiders here at home, suggesting that the US as the truck bearing the main Zidera load with Britain and other Western countries as its trailers plan to offload more punitive sanctions on some senior Government as well as on some senior ruling Zanu-PF leaders. Land, very rich land for that matter was repossessed from white settlers occupying it by force and redistributed to peasants for whom that asset was an endowment from God who made black people reside on the land in question in the first place. As a matter of fact, and whether Western imperialists and the stooges they desperately wish to see in power like it or not, see it or not, land reform was, and will forever remain THE ELABORATION of the armed struggle to liberate our people from racist foreign rule so that, like other free Africans, our people would walk with their heads thrust high. What becomes conspicuous by the clear refusal to lift the economic embargo which has caused untold economic and social challenges for Zimbabweans, is that birds of a feather in former United States president Barack Obama, ironically fathered by a Kenyan, the most recent former president Donald Trump and current president Joe Bidden are birds of a feather flying together with their European allies and against Zimbabwe. Which is probably why some Zimbabweans and perhaps other Africans elsewhere appear sold to the conspiracy theory that Western- manufactured Covid-19 vaccines are meant to poison rather than protect or immunise Africans as well as other races against the Covid-19 virus. Of course nothing could be further from the truth as scientists in Africa have stated in assuring everyone to receive their jabs. What appears obvious is that some Western countries are de-campaigning their traditional Eastern opponents in their competition for the lucrative African market for the anti-coronavirus vaccine. As matter of fact, if wishes were horses enemies of the Zanu-PF Government and the people of Zimbabwe would ride them joyfully if the Covid-19 virus wiped us off the face of this earth after their economic sanctions failed to achieve that goal. In fact, if those who imposed sanctions on the country had the wherewithal, they might have blacked out Zimbabwe from the torrential rain that has fallen all over the country this year as the reinforcement of the existing economic embargo in apparent hopes that drought and starvation would force our people to rebel against their Government and in that way effect regime change which has eluded and frustrated Western imperialists. If God who made us in His image and likeness is for us, no enemies’ machinations can succeed against us. As things appear right now, this country is headed for the best harvest of food crops in decades and thanks to God for blessing us with a deluge of rainfall. As such, it behoves on Zimbabweans to hold thanksgiving ceremonies or festivals after the harvest to thank the Almighty for his love for our nation, with church leaders presiding and political figures present to give guidelines on the storage or safety or sales of some of the food to raise income for their families as well as for financing future agricultural projects. That way, the thief, killer and destroyer, the devil and his supporters, the enemies of this country, will be put to shame.