The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Regional director of the National Gallery of Zimbabwe in Bulawayo, Butholezwe Kgosi Nyathi has said there is a need to have players who will advocate for change in the arts industry in order for the sector to be sustainable. For a year now, the arts sector has been plunged into darkness due to Covid-19 with a bleak future. Irked by this, the arts practitioner spoke boldly about the state of affairs in the industry and gave suggestions of how some of the challenges can be addressed. Responding to questions asked during an extensive TIME Project presentation last week, Nyathi said formalisation of the sector is an inevitable move if the industry is to grow. “Our problems are well documented. That more than 54 percent (even more) of creatives subsidise their creative income with income from other jobs is telling. Creative sector jobs are precarious. The sector broadly needs some form of formality as informality doesn’t attract needed public and private finance,” suggested Nyathi. “Some artistes need training while others need space (to work from). We need audience development and a strict enforcement of Intellectual Property regulations. We know the problems and what needs to be done, we just need change agents (players who will advocate for change).” Nyathi said as an arts exhibition institution, they stand firm in ensuring the southern region rightfully claims and shows off its rich cultural muscle. “The gallery as a creature of statute exists to advance the cultural interests of the south-west region of Zimbabwe. We provide working space and exhibition opportunities to visual artists from rural and urban communities and therein lies diversity. “Diversity also manifests through us providing opportunities to women and youths to showcase their visual talents. We have over the years, also supported the greater creative eco-system by allowing other art forms to use the gallery as a venue of choice. We consider ourselves to be the home of the arts in the region. If Bulawayo is the cultural capital, then the gallery must radiate that claimed vibrancy,” he said. During the lockdown last year, Nyathi said they had to tap into the new normal. “We migrated all our exhibitions to the digital realm. The good thing is we had started doing this prior to the pandemic so we just had to accelerate the digital agenda. Our social media platforms kept us visible and relevant, but of course there were frustrations. Engaging artists online was a stretch due to smartphones and internet access issues. “Also, viewing works of art online is not the same as physical consumption. Going forward, a hybrid approach is ideal – a mix of physical and online,” said Nyathi. He said conducting business virtually was a broadly exciting challenge. The gallery director went on to invite people to join the Friends of the Gallery to support artists. “This to me will be a practical expression of your love for the gallery. Also, fellowships are good for networking,” he said. Turning to his private life, Nyathi, son to legend Pathisa Nyathi said: “The apple really does not fall far from the tree. I grew up in a rich cultural environment and inspiration to pursue the arts was always abundant. I’ve had different jobs, but I’ve discovered my passion and interest in arts, culture and heritage. “Creativity is an exciting challenge and I enjoy conceptualising and executing arts projects. Arts spaces are fun so why not have fun as you work.” – @mthabisi_mthire