The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
Mberengwa South legislator, Cde Alum Mpofu has died. Cde Mpofu who reportedly had a long history of kidney problems, collapsed at his home in Masvingo on Sunday and was pronounced dead on admission to a local hospital. Zanu-PF Midlands Provincial spokesperson, Cde Cornelius Mpereri confirmed the MP’s death. “I have learnt with shock the untimely death of Hon Mpofu. I am told he collapsed while at his home and died upon admission to hospital. We have lost a loyal cadre as a province; we have lost someone who was very dedicated to his work and we say may his soul rest in peace,” said Cde Mpereri. “I am told he had kidney problems and he collapsed at his home in Masvingo and died on Sunday. We are yet to ascertain the cause of death but as of now that is what we know.” Cde Mpereri said Cde Mpofu’s death was not only a loss to the party but to the nation as a whole. “In Hon Mpofu, not only the Mberengwa people have lost a representative but the party as a whole and the country at large, has lost a very dedicated cadre who is not easy to replace,” he said Burial arrangements will be announced in due course. Early this month, Cde Mpofu moved a motion to enact a law that prohibits any Zimbabwean from communicating false information that harms the country’s interests. The MP said he was concerned that the negative portrayal of the country’s image and reputation has an adverse and crippling impact on the country’s economic prospects especially on tourism, investment, and the welfare of the vulnerable such as youths, women and the disabled. He noted that other jurisdictions, recognising the need to preserve their image and soft power in a competitive global village, enacted laws that bar their citizens from engaging in unpatriotic activities and communication intended to denigrate the integrity of their homeland. “Now therefore, call upon this august House to enact a law that: a) recognises and celebrates efforts made by Zimbabwean citizens at home and abroad to promote the country’s positive image and brand; and b) prohibits any Zimbabwean citizen from wilfully communicating messages intended to harm the image and reputation of the country on international platforms or engaging with foreign countries with the intention of communicating messages intended to harm the country’s positive image, and or to undermine its integrity and reputation,” he said.