The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo
WHEN news on the death of the “Ghetto King”, Soul Jah Love (real name Saul Musaka) broke last month, the grief could be felt all around. His fans, friends and family could not hide their disbelief of his untimely demise. It came as a shock to many that the Zimdancehall chanter was no more. He was loved for many reasons — his lyrical prowess being top of the list. Chibaba, as he was affectionately known by his bands of fans, died following a drug overdose on February 16. His was an embattled life, growing up a downtrodden “good for nothing child”, who had to dust himself up and pick up the pieces to make a name for himself. Chigunduru suffered ill-health which often slowed him down and dented his career, but he remained loved by his loyal fans. He struggled with substance abuse which ultimately led to his death. What was apparent however, in his short life was that he loved music and treasured his ex-wife, Bounty Lisa. Their relationship was topsy-turvy which led Bounty Lisa to call time on their five-year marriage. She moved on with another man with which she had a child, but Soul Jah Love continued to profess his undying love for her even after she had divorced him. It was when Soul Jah Love breathed his last that we actually got to learn just how much Bounty Lisa loved him. In an interview after the Zimdancehall artiste’s death, Bounty Lisa shared how the five years she was married to Soul Jah Love were the best of her life. She spoke glowingly about the bond the two shared, adding that despite the drama in their relationship, she loved Soul Jah Love dearly. Bounty Lisa said the late musician had been her mentor and their relationship had remained civil even after their breakup. At the time of the interview, she still struggling to come to terms with his death and appeared distraught, like a grieving widow would. A few weeks after Soul Jah Love’s burial, Bounty Lisa released a tribute song, Ngwendeza. While most would want nothing to do with their ex-lovers after a breakup, Bounty Lisa shocked many with this gesture with most saying she behaved as though she was still in a relationship with Soul Jah Love at the time of his death. Many others have hinted on how much of an understanding man her husband must be for her to be going to town about her relationship with her ex-lover. Others have just boiled it down to her maximising on the attention to boost her career. We may never know what the real reasons for her behaviour are. Meanwhile, on the flip side, many have faced criticism for moving on “too soon” after losing a partner. Some sections of society dictate that a woman should not remarry after losing her husband as this is disrespectful to her late spouse. They liken it to her cheating on him. Others prefer that a widow or widower wait at least a year before moving as a way to honour the memory of their late partner. For some, moving on is determined by their readiness. Even if it means doing so in a couple of days, weeks or months after burying their partner. While Bounty Lisa has been criticised much for making her feelings about Soul Jah Love public and seemingly disrespecting her husband, what is clear is that life has no formula. In fact, life is fluid. Bounty Lisa’s story is a true reflection that the heart wants what it wants. She may be married to another man but who knows, her heart may still belong to Soul Jah Love, even beyond the grave. – @Yolisswa.