The Chronicle Uzalo actor, Cebolenkosi Mthembu who plays the role of Nyawo has apparently lost his voice. The character who used to be captain Nyawo and has now been demoted to detective Nyawo because of his incompetence has become a fan-favourite and a household name because of his humour. He apparently also works for a community radio station; Vibe FM and hasn’t been able to work on radio since his voice is gone. The multitalented actor and radio personality also studied Electrical Engineering and was rumoured to be working for Eskom as a technician inspector. It was unclear at the time of publishing this article if he was still working there or had resigned. In an interview with Daily Sun, Mthembu revealed that he lost his voice at the beginning of February and this has affected both his acting and radio career. “I was diagnosed with Covid-19 at the beginning of this year. My father was too and he died on 3 January. “After my self-isolation, I was cleared of Covid so I went back to work. But my voice just disappeared this month. I went back to consult a doctor, but he gave me something for Covid. “I have tried drinking honey, Vitamin C supplements, but nothing is working. “Presenters like myself hope big radio stations will hire them, but honestly, which radio stations could hire someone who is voiceless. I’m scared; I don’t know what to do now. My voice is everything. “Now I have lost it, I feel like I’m losing everything.” ZAlebs previously reported that Mthembu revealed in another interview with Daily Sun that the actor was left heartbroken as he could not attend his father’s funeral nor plan it as the firstborn. “Covid-19 has brought me double heartache. While fighting it, I’m also hurting that I couldn’t bid farewell to my father or even arrange his funeral as his firstborn. I didn’t have a choice but to protect everyone. “This is the time to be safe and protect each other. It hurts that our parents are leaving because of this pandemic.”
Mthembu also revealed that his voice is affecting his season 7 scenes which will start airing on March 8. – Zalebs