The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
THERE is a series that is being produced in Bulawayo that the public should look out for. Titled Soul Mate, the series that has a star-studded cast is being produced by Heart FX Studio, AfroJams Studios and Pishavilla Communications. The three companies who recently teamed up are working on a potential hit series, if the trailer, which portrays the life of those in the City of Kings and Queens, is anything to go by. Watching the trailer which is available on the Instagram page @soulmate_tvshow, one is left wondering why the corporate world continues to shun such fine talent. Pishavilla Communications founder, Tavaka Matunha, said: “The series is a story about two lovers who will take us on a journey that will reveal how they ended up becoming soulmates. Amidst their respective narrations, viewers will see all the ups and downs leading to their love story. The story is complex and yet enticing to watch.” Matunha called on sponsors to come on board and support them in order for the series to come out as planned. “We’re looking for sponsors to help fund the project to ensure that we finish on time and market our project. Once they do this, it’ll change the narrative that arts don’t pay, especially in Bulawayo. We want to make sure our sound, visuals and acting is on-point as we intend to promote the production internationally as well,” said Matunha. The Soul Mate lead roles are being played by media personality, Braydan Heart as Phumza and Randall Ncube as Locracia. Also starring is multi-award winning actress Qeqe Mntambo as Thandie, model Ben Chest as Dumisani, Ntombi Buhlungu as Anita, actor Calvin Madula as Lyon, Perfect Nkiwane as Owen and Matunha as Mandla. “This project is being spearheaded by young creatives and we’re enjoying shooting and working together, especially in these trying times. We are also learning from each other and are really hoping to make money from this project so that we can pay our team. “In all this, we want to inspire other creatives around Zimbabwe to work together and enhance the growth of our arts industry,” said Matunha. -@mthabisi_mthire.