The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
AS uncertainty over the availability of the France-based duo of Tinotenda Kadewere and Marshall Munetsi for the Afcon qualifiers continues, Zifa has engaged the Mozambique Football Federation to assist transport the two key players. Earlier last week, the French League said Ligue 1 and Ligue 2 clubs “would not make available for selection the foreign players summoned for matches outside the EU/EEA zone during the next international period in March”. However, after protests by some Ligue 1 clubs, coaches and players over the decision, the French government was forced to intervene and provided a waiver. One of the conditions set for football federations that want to invite players is that they must provide a private jet for transporting the players. Zifa communications manager Xolisani Gwesela said: “We have engaged the Mozambique Football Federation, who have in principle agreed to assist us to transport the players back to France after the qualifiers. They might not be available against Botswana, but could be here against Zambia. “The Mozambique Football Association engaged their government which agreed to provide the private flight to Mozambique national team players who are based in France. We have written to the Sports and Recreation Commission and they have forwarded our correspondence to the Ministry of Sport.” Zimbabwe play Botswana tomorrow before hosting Zambia at the National Sports Stadium on Monday. Meanwhile, South African-based Warriors’ midfielder Butholezwe Ncube and United States of America-based defender Tendai Jirira are expected to join camp late after missing their flights. The duo is part of a 23-man squad called-up for the crucial Afcon qualifiers. While Jirira, who turns out for Detroit City, is expected to touch down at the Robert Gabriel Mugabe International Airport in Harare at noon today, Chronicle Sport could not establish the exact time of Ncube’s arrival. Ncube twice missed his flight. “Butho (Ncube) missed his flight on Monday and reported to us that they couldn’t locate his visa and when that was done, he was supposed to be on the Tuesday morning flight, but again missed it, this time citing a Covid-19 certificate complication. That is being worked on and we should be sending him a third ticket. I think he’ll arrive earlier than Jirira, who gets here on Wednesday,” said Warriors general manager Wellington Mpandare. Jirira will arrive four hours before the Warriors fly to Botswana, leaving the player with little time to recover from jet leg. The good news is that 15 out of the 23 players are already in camp. Led by Belgium-based skipper Knowledge Musona, the Warriors held their first training session on Monday. Spain-based Martin Mapisa, the Turkey-based duo of Teenage Hadebe and Alec Mudimu as well as Romario Matova who plies his trade in Croatia, were expected to arrive yesterday. Algeria lead the group and have already qualified for the finals to be held in Cameroon next year. The other slot is still up for grabs with Zimbabwe, Zambia and Botswana all in contention. Zimbabwe are second in the group with five points, a point ahead of the Zebras while Zambia are bottom of the table with three points. Warriors players in camp
Talbert Shumba, Ariel Sibanda, Victor Kamhuka, Gilroy Chimwemwe, Jimmy Dzingai, Tanaka Chinyahara, Kuda Mahachi, Thabani Kamusoko, Knowledge Musona, Tafadzwa Rusike, Last jesi, Perefect Chikwende, Ovidy Karuru, Evans Rusike, Terrence Dzvukamanja