The Chronicle Sports Reporter
CEO and executive director of the Old Mutual Heath Streak Cricket Academy Joseph Rego has urged Zimbabweans, especially sportspersons, to take part in the free, voluntary Covid-19 vaccination programme and ignore rumours and misleading information about the exercise. Rego said the vaccination is a simple, safe and effective way to protect lives from Covid-19 infection. The vaccine trains the immune system to create antibodies just as it does when it’s exposed to disease. It uses the body’s natural defences to build resistance to Covid-19 and makes the immune system stronger. Rego, who was vaccinated at Wilkins Hospital in Harare yesterday, said he was informed that being diabetic and suffering from a heart ailment put him at an increased risk of developing severe symptoms and complications if infected by Covid-19. Rego hailed President Mnangagwa and Government for mobilising vaccines to protect lives of millions of Zimbabweans. President Mnangagwa is also Patron of the Old Mutual Heath Streak Cricket Academy Trust. In-spite of the economic challenges the country has been facing, Old Mutual Heath Streak Cricket Academy Trust has made giant strides in the growth and development of cricket in Zimbabwe. With a genuine intent and desire to shape a brighter cricketing future for children in Zimbabwe, the academy identifies, nurtures and grooms young talented players, some of who have gone on to represent the country in various age-group levels. “The development agenda focusing on grassroots development and age groups structure adopted by the Old Mutual Heath Streak Academy has been very successful and more young Zimbabweans are being attracted to the game. “Our age-group teams pre-colts, U/11, U/12, U/13, U/14, U/15, U/16, U/17 and U/18 levels have been winning international tournaments,” said Rego. “The academy is very passionate about the game and our aim is to ensure that our talented cricketers have the very best opportunities and a first class future to help Zimbabwe regain its cricketing glory.” The academy nominates players to attend provincial age-group trials relevant to ability and potential. It plans to host its prestigious flagship Under-15 cricket tournament, The President’s Afro-Asia Cricket Cup, featuring various African and Asian countries subject to permission fleeing granted by the Sports and Recreation Commission. The tournament has increased in popularity and is like a mini Under-15 Cricket World Cup.