The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
IYASA director, Nkululeko Innocent Dube who was accorded legendary status by the National Arts Merit Awards (Nama) this past weekend says the legacy of the group should live after him. He said he believes his honour is part of the group’s success story. Dube was named among 40 other Zimbabwean legends at the Nama Legends@40 awards that were held virtually on Saturday evening. Other legends who were honoured include, Lovemore Majaivana, Thomas Mapfumo, Alick Macheso, Albert Nyathi, Cont Mhlanga, Felix Moyo, Ben Mahaka, Barbara Makhalisa, Ellen Mlangeni and Chirikure Chirikure. Dube who established Iyasa 20 years ago as a drama creative group at Mpopoma High School, described the award as a milestone for him. “It’s a milestone for me. At the same time, I believe it’s collective recognition for the work Iyasa has done over the years. I received the award on behalf of all the efforts of everyone who has been a part of the brand’s success story,” Dube said. He also hailed those behind the legends awards saying they should be applauded for their noble gesture. “It’s humbling to be given roses while you can still smell them and Nama should be applauded for that, not only for me, but all recipients of the honours,” he said. Dube said he attributes this legendary status to the group’s hard work over the years. “It’s been a lot of sacrifices, commitment, and hard work as well as networking with other creatives. Staying visible and relevant and not letting any opportunity, big or small, pass you,” he said. Turning to their plans for this year, Dube said it is business as usual adding that they want to further boost their projects like the annual school’s programme – Isiphiwo Sami talent search and Credisi – an initiative meant to expose artistes to audiences. “This year it’s business as usual. We need to ensure survival beyond Covid-19 as things are really uncertain in the arts at the moment. We had already started expanding our scope of involvement in the arts through projects like Isiphiwo and Credisi. We want to do more. The legacy must live on and even well beyond me,” said Dube. Iyasa, one of the most celebrated performing arts schools in Zimbabwe has defied odds over the years by taking the local home-brewed talent to the world. Since its inception, the brand has churned out the likes of Sandra Ndebele, Nkwali, Future Sibanda, Roben Mlauzi, Prelude Sibindi, DJ Prince Eskhosini, Nqobile Malinga, Mitchelle Msopero, Newman Gondwe, Bukhosi Nyathi, Benhilda Ngwenya and Tsungai Tsikirai who have become household names.