The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Showbiz Reporter MARTIN Sibanda and Ndolwane Super Sound’s much-awaited album, Uyavuma will finally be released tomorrow with excitement among fans at fever pitch. The Big Boss’s manager, Lucky Moyo said the album will be officially launched on March 27 adding that they are targeting to sell at least 10 000 copies during the first phase of release. “Our wish is for the album to be available everywhere so we’ve created a distribution network in South Africa, Botswana and Zimbabwe. Those in other countries will be able to buy the album on digital stores. We want to start with 10 000 copies then we’ll take it from there,” said Moyo. He said in Bulawayo, Thandazani Nyoni who is part of the management will be responsible for distribution. The Big Boss, as Sibanda is affectionately known, this past weekend took time to engage fans on his social media platforms. The main agenda was the upcoming third solo album. “Just to explain, on 12 March, 2021, the album will be available and on the 27th of March, it’ll be show day to officially launch the album. Those who wish to make pre-orders can go ahead as we’ll make sure that the album is available to everyone who wants it,” he told fans. His followers asked for the names of the tracks as well as the artistes who played the guitars among other questions. Sadly, the Big Boss did not want to share much information fearing that it would take away the fun from the release. “Who played the bass guitar, lead, rhythms and drums,” asked one Sikhumbuzo Serenduna Phuthi to which the Big Boss responded: “Ngamajongosi,” his band members. Another fan, Mpofu Makama Elvis asked if the album will be as good as Bakhuzeni of which the Big Boss responded: “I’ve never doubted my work therefore I can assure you that you’ll receive Uyavuma as it is.” Quizzed how much the album will cost, the artiste said R60. For months now, the Big Boss has been building up the release of the album starting with the announcement of the launch day which was followed by the unveiling of the album title. Last week, he released the album sleeve. It is clear that the musician and his management are pulling all stops to help boost the album with new and crafty marketing skills being used. Martin is undeniably one of the best vocalists in the rhumba genre and it remains to be seen how far he has raised or lowered his own standards in this upcoming production. – @themkhust  