The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
In recent times, local rap music has been conquered by two artistes, Crisswiss and The Dot who each time they collaborate, have been coming up with hits that become anthems although little is known about their musical journeys. For their efforts, the Bad Vibes hit-makers were last year adjudged the Best Group/Duo at the Zimbabwe Hip Hop Awards, a feat they followed up this year as they were named the Best Group/Duo at the Zimbabwe Music Awards. Chronicle Showbiz caught up with the two artistes who each narrated how working together has made them look like a group due to their well-orchestrated collaborations. Crisswiss (real name Blessing Bejile), a Bulawayo-born and bred rapper has one album, Room 328: The Bridgeview which is a collaborative album with The Dot and one single Thandy Marley that features Asaph. He has collaborated with several South African artistes namely Ginger Trill, Celestial Mic, Zingah – formerly Smashis of Cashtime Fam, a Hip Hop group headed by South African rap giants KO and Ma Eazy. “From 2008 to 2012, I was with a group which was called The Fat Boyz with The Dot and Sky City Uno. During that time, we worked on several mixtapes and our last release was with the popular South African production label, Blackstorm who produced our debut single –All day. “Between 2012 and 2014, I was part of Summer of 89 with Sky City Uno where we worked on a single titled Friends which was played on South African radio stations,” he said. Between 2014 and 2020, Crisswiss said he took a hiatus from music and went to South Africa. Later in 2020, he bounced back and released a collaborative album with The Dot titled Room 328: The Bridgeview that was to change the game. It featured the popular track, Bad Vibes. “The album featured a host of artistes among them songstress Lee McHoney and rappers; Vic Jita, MUSE, Real Shona, Uno XO and Burgersfort’s own CzAr ODriego from South Africa. It was exclusively produced by Zimbabwean producers; Rayo Beats of Mambo fame, Phanas, Gatso and AyKay King – of Like So fame,” said Crisswiss. He said this album was named after the actual room and apartment where they solidified their artistry in and got to meet and create music with similarly talented artistes in Johannesburg. The originality of the album saw it get nominated in four categories at the 2020 Zim Hip Hop Awards – Best Duo, Best Collaboration, Best Album and Song of the year. The Dot’s love for music began when he used to dance to Kanda Bongo Man’s music and Rhumba music. Born Wilson Tendekai Matarutso in Mutare and growing up in Bulawayo’s Morningside suburb, the rapper ventured into music professionally in 2010. He has two albums, So Far So Good and their collaborative effort with Crisswiss as well as two EPs – Songs 4 Ladies and Somewhere in Zimbabwe. “The love of the art led me to discover other genres and I eventually fell in love with Hip Hop. I recorded my first record at the age of 13 and three years later, I formed the group Fat Boyz with high school friends Sky City Uno and Crisswiss. Like many artistic groups and collectives, the crew ceased to exist after five years,” he said. The Dot said he also underwent a two-year hiatus and returned with the single Ndikadai that received much critical acclaim. “I went on to release the EP, Songs 4 Ladies in the year of 2016, which had lead singles Call Me and Lomntwana featuring fellow Bulawayo rapper Mc Tytoh. It received favourable rotation on the airwaves. “In 2017, I released my debut album, So Far So Good which had singles Ndikadai, Pakaipa featuring Mlue Jay, Ka1 and Vhumba Valley that proved popular,” he said. In November, 2019, the rapper dropped a five-track EP named Somewhere in Zimbabwe which was accompanied by a series on YouTube. -@mthabisi_mthire.