The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
His teaching skills are not only limited to the classroom, but his passion for music has seen him nurture a lot of talent in Kwekwe from grassroots. An all-rounder teacher is the best way to describe one Tawanda Jumo, better known by his stage name Bantuman I. Born in Chivhu in 1975, Bantuman I completed his Business Studies at Kwekwe Polytechnic College before joining Chinhoyi Technical Teachers College where he did boiler making. From there, he joined the ministry of education as a teacher. He started off teaching in Zhombe at Donjane Secondary before moving to Manunure High School where he is now teaching Metal Work. However, his passion for music could not be squashed as he started a music club at Manunure. With the support of the school’s headmaster Charles Nzvenge, Bantuman I managed to record a compilation where the students sang a variety of tracks. “The project titled Manunure Mic Fever was a success as most songs got airplay from a number of radio stations. It was so successful that it produced a number of talented artists as well,” said the 46-year-old. Sweet B, South Africa-based Gracious and internationally-acclaimed contemporary reggae/dancehall artiste Don Franco are some of the artists who were unleashed from the project. Following the success of this project, Bantuman I ventured into more projects. “We then did another project, Chipo Ndechangu Volume 1 and 2. This project featured students from other schools like Mbizo High and other neighbouring ones. Again, it was a success and a number of artists were born,” he said. As more students and artists thronged Manunure High School for rehearsals, this drew a lot of attention from other students thereby disrupting the learning process. This left Bantuman I with no option but to look for another venue off the school’s premises to pursue his music training passion. “I approached Kwekwe City Council and outlined the project to them. They offered us space at Mbizo Youth Centre. Later on, they gave us space at Kwekwe Theatre marking the birth of Bantu Entertainment which also owns Bantu Studios,” he explained. Interestingly, Bantuman I said Kwekwe City Fathers gave him the space for free and would also offer him halls to conduct his talent shows among others for free. Since the formation of Bantu Studios in 2011, it has grown and now boasts of churning out some of the country’s finest artists. Among these is Peter Moyo, the late Tongai Moyo’s protégé who used to fine-tune his vocals there after being thrown into the fray, straight from the football pitch following his father’s death.