The Chronicle Melody Dube, Showbiz Reporter
Filmmaking in Zimbabwe is a field many local artistes rarely venture in as the industry which is still growing, is unpopular.
However, Bulawayo-based film director and author, Gift Wazvaremhaka aka Borntrouble wants to prove that there is hope for success in this industry. Borntrouble who is working on a project called The Dead End, an action series expected to be out by June, is a 28-year-old man who was born and bred in Njanja, Chivhu in Mashonaland East. He attended Chawatama and Mhari High schools as an Arts student. He then went on to study media at Harare Polytechnic as a way to polish his writing and filmmaking skills. After his schooling years, Borntrouble got involved in several projects as a director and actor. One of his recognisable works was the 2017 production, Wakazvinyira Wega, a drama that he directed and also starred in as one of the characters. His works include directing skits like Bhebhi ReMonya, Tambai Mushe, Game yemaRasta, Uncle Nino and online series No One Is Perfect. The film industry, Borntrouble said, was not for the faint-hearted as it is tough to penetrate and this probably explains why many are not keen to venture into the industry. “My journey has been rough but this never deterred me as I kept on toiling on the streets of arts to uplift myself. I cannot say everything is okay now but it’s getting better.” Having been a freelancer for a long time, Borntrouble now has his own production company, Skypper Movies which he founded with Proud Solomon Tambu, a martial arts artist known as Skypper who is his assistant director. The two are working on a project titled The Dead End which is an action series. Some of the characters in the film include Skypper the protagonist; Sneider Adams, a national Taekondo trainer based in Harare and Sylvester Nyoni, a national Kung Fu Master. Borntrouble said he hopes to receive support for his upcoming film from locals as it will go a long way in developing the local film industry. If he gets the needed recognition through The Dead End, he said this might attract funding for his future projects. He said he was starting with the local market after which he will go international. Borntrouble said he hopes a breakthrough in the international market will not only benefit him but the growth of the local film industry as a whole. When all this is achieved, Borntrouble sees himself penetrating Bollywood or Nollywood where his inspiration lies. He said his work is actually influenced by the likes of Salman Khan from Bollywood and Hollywood’s Sylvester Stallone. To all the artistes who are hoping to pursue careers in film, the passionate artiste said: “Passion is the best necessity. Have it, conquer your fears and you’ll tread on paths where wolves fear to prey.” Other than film, Borntrouble is an author who has published two books. His first book titled Pepukai was published in 2017. A year later, he published another, a Christian one titled The road to Sungano Apostolic Church.