The Chronicle THE Murehwa Rural District Council (RDC) is leading by example as it scooped a prestigious award in recognition of its efforts in promoting and supporting gender initiatives and development activities within the district. The RDC was presented with the Centre of Excellence Award for Gender and Governance in the Rural Local Authorities category. The Award is attributed to the dedication and the commitment it has for its citizens in terms of gender responsive service delivery also highlighted by the Authority’s mission to uplift the general living standards of our citizenry. Murehwa RDC personal assistant to the CEO and gender focal person Winnet Chitauro gives credit to co-operation and sturdy leadership for the win. “Also through the teamwork and commitment of the Murehwa RDC policy makers with the leadership of Alderman Gutu as the Chairperson and the Executive under the leadership of a dedicated leader Dr A M Gurajena,” she said. The Award is a momentous achievement which will aid in continuing to drive forward the gender empowerment initiative. “It is a pride of the district which will put our district and Council on an Excellence position as we continue to mainstream gender in all our activities and plans,” she added. Looking ahead the Murehwa RDC hopes to see more economically empowered women and reduced cases of gender-based violence (GBV) as the Council continues to support women local economic development initiatives. More RDCs are encouraged to support the women in their respective districts in order to see real progress and to create better foundations for sustainable livelihoods. “We are advising other local authorities to adopt Gender responsive budgets and implement them and also to come up with policies and action plans for better service delivery. Teamwork and dedication is key in meeting target,” said Ms Chitauro. The Council has put in place methods to combat the socio-economic challenges brought on by Covid-19, including: Enhancing response to GBV through operationalisation of the GBV one-stop centre and sending bulk awareness messages.