The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Chronicle Reporter
THE Government is concerned over the traditional way of managing livestock by some farmers in the country which has affected value of the animals. This was said by the Minister of State in Vice President Dr Constantino Chiwenga’s office, Dr Evelyn Ndlovu while addressing farmers in Mangwe District yesterday. Dr Ndlovu is on a tour of various provinces meeting farmers to promote better livestock farming practices and water conservation. “The purpose of my visit is to promote livestock production and effective management of livestock by our farmers both in rural areas and in the resettlement areas. We are also targeting both commercial and noncommercial farmers to grow the national herd,” she said. Dr Ndlovu said it is crucial for farmers to know how to manage their livestock as farming is a good business that could push the country to achieve its development agenda. “Effective livestock management means that you timeously dispose the animal before it is too old. It will have better value in terms of the price and the meat even tastes better. If you sell an old cow the value per kg will be less. If you sell early you can invest the money which will help spur your production because you are able to buy more cows that can increase your production,” she said. Minister Ndlovu said water and land conservation was important for farmers adding that Government is ready to assist farmers to harvest water through dam construction in their areas. She said the Government was glad that indigenous farmers were now hosting cattle sales with commercial farmers coming to buy from them which proves the success of the land reform programme. “The second issue is that we are promoting water harvesting. If a farmer finds that there is potential for dam construction in their farms, they need to register with the government their interests so that they get assistance. We have had too much rains this year and it will be unfortunate to let all this water just flow away,” said Dr Ndlovu. She urged farmers to keep proper records of their livestock like it is done in any business environment. “We also have the problem of over grazing the land. Some of you keep large herds of cattle against limited pastures and in the event of droughts and diseases outbreaks you lose your cattle. Vaccination of livestock is another challenge because of high cost of vaccines and lack of cooperation between farmers and veterinary services officers,” said Minister Ndlovu. Dr Ndlovu also urged farmers to transform their operations into commercial enterprises where they regularly sell their cattle to realise high value rather than selling them only during droughts where they are ripped off by buyers. She urged veterinary officers to work closely with farmers and give them proper advice so that farmers can maximise benefits. Dr Ndlovu also called for the opening of more cattle and livestock auctions to create competition among buyers.-@themkhust