The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
Australia-based Jiti musician, Cozy Kozile who hails from Kwekwe is brewing a single with Dendera crooner Allan Chimbetu. The single titled Hombarume is being produced by Maselo and is expected to be released in a fortnight. Chimbetu confirmed the development saying he is excited by the collaboration as he wants to impart his music knowledge to up-and-coming artistes. “I’m working on a single with Kozile whereby he is recording his bit in Australia while I’m doing mine this side. We’re both sending our recordings to Maselo for engineering and are hoping to have the song ready in the next two weeks. “This collaboration couldn’t have come at a better time as I feel it’s time I help up-and-coming artistes because of the experience I’ve acquired from the time I started doing music many years ago,” said Chimbetu adding that he is available for any musician who wants his guidance. Chimbetu, who is one of the founding members of the Dendera music genre said if all goes according to plan, he will record a video for the song with Kozile. On his part, Kozile (real name Cozy Kozile Dube) who caught the eye of Australian arts promoters and businesspeople after a splendid performance at the Jambo Festival that was held there at the start of last year, said he was humbled to be working with Chimbetu whom he regards as a father. He said he has been teaching him music behind the scenes for a while. “We’re working on my new project with mudhara Chimbetu. He’s been helping me with music behind the scenes and I’m looking forward to doing more projects with him,” Kozile said. Once Covid-19 restrictions are lifted, Kozile said he would love to embark on a nationwide tour with Chimbetu. The musician who was inspired by the likes of James Chimombe, James Chibadura and Tongai Moyo has one album, Uchandifunga that he released in 2019. Featured on this album are locals, Carlos Green on the track Matiregerera and Mucha Lauti (Australia-based) on the song Mudiwa Wangu. He also has eight singles. He is working on another project titled Zimbabwe Kumba. Quizzed how he has managed to collaborate with locals yet he is abroad, Kozile said: “Before I started the music journey, I made friends with musicians. Peter Moyo for example was my best friend from childhood and he linked me up with different artistes. “Each time he’d do his shows, I’d intereact with various artistes such as Carlos Green so contacting them for collaborations has been easy”. He said he started doing music in 2019 following calls by sungura musician, Ronnie Mudhindo after spotting his talent by listening to him speak. He gave in and recorded a single for fun. After sharing it, people enjoyed it and requested that he records more music. “After listening to my first song which I did for fun, people started asking me to sing more not knowing I only had that one song. From there, I saw the potential I possessed and recorded an album,” Kozile said.