The Chronicle THE government this week eased the country’s Covid-19 induced lockdown conditions in a move informed by the significant drop in new cases and the very few or no deaths recorded over the past week. The easing of the Level 4 lockdown is also primarily aimed at kick-starting economic activity and reviving businesses and industries, that had been hit hard by the tight lockdown since the beginning of the year. The government was however quick to point out that the war against the deadly coronavirus pandemic is far from over, urging citizens to continue to follow all the guidelines set to prevent the spread of the disease, including the wearing of masks, the regular washing of hands and the use of hand sanitisers, along with maintaining physical and social distancing in public areas. Mindful of the need to protect its customers, it’s employees, contractors and the nation at large, Vaya Logistics has partnered with major wholesaler and retailers, including Gain Cash & Carry, Spar shops and Agricura among others, to deliver groceries and equipment to clients’ doorsteps. Vaya Logistics – a subsidiary of Cassava Smartech Zimbabwe – is already helping ferry thousands of essential workers across the country through its reliable transport network. Cassava Smartech Chief Commercial Officer Mr Givemore Jojo said while the economy was beginning to open up, it was critical – especially for those who are at higher risk due to age or pre-existing conditions – to be circumspect about visiting grocery shops and crowed areas during the pandemic. “We decided to play our part in fighting the Covid-19 pandemic through the convenient use of online shopping. We are encouraging the public to continue exercising caution by doing online shopping from the likes of Gain Cash & Carry. Vaya will deliver the goods right to your doorsteps,” he said, adding that this would be at an affordable price and great convenience to the customer. Describing the purchase process, Mr Jojo said customers simply need to text a list of the items they would like to purchase, and the delivery address, make their payments using EcoCash, bank transfer or Zipit, and Vaya’s on-demand logistics service will deliver the groceries within a few hours. The logistics firm was designed to connect transport owners with those requiring the transportation of their goods. It offers fast and reliable transport and is 100 percent compliant with all regulatory guidelines. Mr Jojo said Cassava Smartech was using technologies at its disposal to help millions of Zimbabweans cope with the coronavirus pandemic. “The group continues to develop innovative digital solutions to create convenience in the lives of Zimbabweans. Our model is built on driving innovation that addresses the day-to-day challenges of our customers. “Our understanding of the local market, the dedication of our staff, along with the vast ecosystem we have put together, afford us the advantage to be able to continue creating value for our customers and shareholders, and to support the country’s economic development,” he said. Vaya Logistics is also building on its relationship with Gain Cash & Carry and Spar to extend the partnership to other retailers and manufacturing companies around the country, targeting the huge online commerce market. “We want to extend this deal to as many retailers and wholesalers as possible, so that we bring real convenience to our customers in both urban and rural areas. We believe there is so much value and convenience we can create to positively impact millions of our people,” Mr JoJo said.