The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
Kwaito artiste, Diliza says when he is on stage he is completely in his element because the energy from the crowd inspires him. It is from this space that the Stiff front-man came up with his most celebrated track, Shaker Mntwana. The last time Diliza was in front of a live audience was during last year’s Bulawayo Arts Awards. Arts activities have been suspended since March last year when lockdown came into effect as part of measures to curb the spread of Covid-19. Diliza says when he is on stage he feeds off the live crowd and gets inspiration for most of his tracks. “I come up with some of my hooks on stage and they become catchy. Thereafter, they inspire songs. That’s why most of my songs are party tracks because they are birthed on stage,” said Diliza who rose to fame following the success of his Umcimbi track with Stiff that featured Professor. He said the song Shaker Mntwana was inspired by a freestyle he did back in 2011 when he performed at a club in Yeoville, South Africa. “I remember it was during Kalawa Mondays back in 2011. I used to move around with Oskido a lot so when he was deejaying, he would give me the microphone and I’d freestyle hooks. “As I was doing so, I freestyled over a beat and the hook for Shaker Mntwana was birthed there as the crowd responded well to it,” said Diliza. Due to the reaction this freestyle received, Diliza said he got a call a week later from DJ Maphorisa, who was signed under Kalawa Jazmee then, asking if he could work with him. “A week after my freestyle in Yeoville, I got a call from DJ Maphorisa asking where I was as he wanted us to work. Luckily, I was in Midrand at Scotch (Kalawa manager’s) house. DJ Maphorisa came and picked me up and we went to Oskido’s studio where we recorded two songs, Shaker Mntwana and Kalawa GP. It took us only three hours,” said Diliza. He said he has not been on stage for a long time due to Covid-19 lockdown restrictions but was optimistic that things will soon normalise. Diliza however, said he is not resting on his laurels as he is working on a song that he is looking at releasing in the next two weeks. The track titled Ngekabani Le Party? features Normara Cowbway and Van Wyk (from Stiff). It is being produced by Cooper Man and Rebellious Suhns. The Amapiano track, Diliza said, was inspired by Kwaito legend Thebe’s song Le Party. “I loved Thebe’s song and his style in general so I thought of re-making one of his songs that I grew up listening to. I can’t wait to share it,” said Diliza. The artiste who was down with a chest infection two years ago that affected his performances, said he is glad to be back and doing what he loves most — recording music.