The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
The Zaka Prince, Nox (real name Enock Guni) is doing the most in neighbouring South Africa with his recent Zimbabwe Music Awards (Zima) win in the Best Afro-pop category clearly well-deserved. After establishing a relationship with man of the moment, Jerusalema hit-maker Master KG last year when the two came up with a banger in the form of single My Melody, Nox has gone a gear up. He has partnered yet another top producer, Durban’s finest, DJ Tira and the two are cooking up what could possibly be another banger. The duo has collaborated on an Afro-house track titled Stay With Me which is being produced by Afrotainment’s Prince Bulo. It is due to be released soon and if the teaser and hype around the song on DJ Tira’s Facebook live this past weekend is anything to go by, then Nox may have just hit the jackpot. As of yesterday afternoon, the Facebook live which was recorded at DJ Tira’s studio in South Africa on Saturday evening had been watched by 140 000 people with many saying the song is on fire. Most also commended DJ Tira for uplifting a Zimbabwean musician and uniting the continent through music. “Malume is uniting the nations through music. Legend indeed,” commented one on the video. Speaking from his base in South Africa, Nox said the year 2021 will shock many as his career will be making inroads into the international scene. He said his relationship with Master KG was paying dividends as he is the one who introduced him to Makoya Bearings (DJ Tira). “I managed to link up with DJ Tira through Master KG and an old friend from my varsity days. This year is going to shock everyone as I have a lot of projects on the cards which I’ve already finished. I’m now just waiting for the proper timing,” the Ndinonyara hit-maker said. “Stay With Me is a love song whereby a guy is saying to his woman ‘if you really love me, why don’t you stay with me’ as I’ll do anything to make you happy and for us to start a family.” Nox said he was grateful to DJ Tira for agreeing to work with him as he is making it possible for him to achieve his vision. “I’ve a lot going on this year. You guys aren’t ready for this. We’re proud and honoured to have worked with DJ Tira as we’ve always wanted to make hits for the whole world. This year we’ve done it and it’s all thanks to DJ Tira,” said Nox while also sharing that he is working with Jamaican musician I-Octane on another collaboration. During the song’s promotion, a visibly excited and humbled DJ Tira also expressed his gratitude saying he could not wait for the song to be released as it will unite nations. “The song’s gonna unite nations. If you’re from Zimbabwe, Angola, Nigeria or Zambia, you’re all going to love this track as we’re all one nation,” said the DJ as he introduced the song. Listening to the song which has strong elements of Durban music and Nox’s Afro-pop, one can already tell that it is going to be a banger as it makes one want to sing along and dance. Nox’s greatness was proven on My Melody as the song whose video has over two million views on YouTube was on rotation on local radio stations and across Limpopo. This song also saw him clinch a Zima. Commenting on his Zima win, Nox who has been in the music industry for over two decades said he appreciates it although it came a little too late as his focus is now on penetrating international markets. “I feel appreciated, but it’s too little too late for me. My focus has already changed as it’s now channelled towards the global market now. I have about 10 awards to date and I hope to clinch many at an international level.” -@mthabisi_mthire