The Chronicle Danisa Masuku, Chronicle Reporter
THE High Court has revoked a stay of auction on Bulawayo businessman Ismail Moosa Lunat’s property over a debt of more than US$384 000 to fellow businessman Mr Mohammed Zakariya Patel. The property, which goes under the hammer on 12 March, includes a Mazda Axela, Toyota Rav4 and Honda Odyssey, laptops, leather couches, television sets, refrigerators, nursery toys and clothes. The goods were supposed to be auctioned on 21 February 2020 in Bulawayo by Auction House after they were attached by the Sheriff of the High Court following Lunat’s failure to pay US$384 177 he owes Mr Patel. Lunat had appealed to the High Court to prevent the property from being auctioned but the Sheriff of the High Court has now been given the green light to sell the property. “Kindly proceed to re-advertise and sell the attached property on the 12th of March 2021 at 10:00am,” reads a letter from the Sheriff’s office. Lunat was in 2019 taken to the High Court by Mr Patel over the debt. On April 3 2019, Mr Patel filed summons through his lawyers Moyo and Nyoni Legal Practitioners, citing Lunat as a defendant. According to court papers, on January 11 2019, Lunat signed an acknowledgement of the debt in the presence of another businessman Hetnesh Suman Patel and offered to pay back the money within three months. Mr Patel later filed an application for summary judgment through Samukange Hungwe Attorneys citing Lunat as a respondent. In his founding affidavit, Mr Patel said his claim against Lunat was premised on the acknowledgement of the debt by the respondent. “In fact, as is apparent on the acknowledgment of debt, the original amount was US$449 000. This was reduced by the respondent to US$384 177 and he duly signed for it. The respondent renounced all legal exceptions and declared himself to be fully acquainted with the debt,” he said. Mr Patel said as a result of Lunat’s failure to settle the debt, he was forced to institute legal action against him. In his defendant’s plea, through his lawyers Dube-Banda, Nzarayapenga and Partners, Lunat denied that he signed the acknowledgement of debt freely. He stated that he signed after Mr Patel threatened to sell his properties belonging to companies owned by the defendant’s relatives whose title deeds were in his possession. “Defendant maintains that he is not indebted to the plaintiff in the sum claimed or any amount at all and insists that he was coerced and pressurised into signing the acknowledgement of debt as a result of threats to sell the immovable properties belonging to companies owned by his relatives,” argued Mr Lunat’s lawyers. The High Court ruled in Mr Patel’s favour and ordered Lunat to pay the money at the prevailing interbank rate.