The Chronicle ENGLAND’S crunch World Cup qualifying match against Albania was under threat last night after a row erupted between police and the local FA. The Three Lions are due to play the European minnows on Sunday in the capital Tirana at the national stadium after jetting in the day before. But today the city’s police chief Rebani Jaupi told the Albanian FA the match could not go ahead in a row over security. Although no fans will be present at the Air Albania stadium, nearby bars and restaurants will be open as the country doesn’t have a lockdown. Mr Jaupi has said his officers cannot guarantee security as many of the venues have large window panels and outside tables and chairs. And last night urgent talks were underway between the FA, police and the government to try and resolve the issue which could put England’s campaign in jeopardy. Andi Vercani, of the Albanian FA, told The Sun: “We are currently trying to resolve this issue with the authorities. It’s something that we hope can be resolved quickly within the next day. “We need it to happen before the England team arrives on Saturday.” The Albanian FA released a strongly-worded statement suggesting plans to postpone the contest would have a “catastrophic consequence” on the country. The statement, posted on Albanian Daily News, read: “Today in the Albanian Football Federation a letter arrived from the Local Police Directorate of Tirana which states the structures of the Local Police Directorate Tirana cannot guarantee the taking of measures before, during and after the Albania-England match. “Faced with the situation where the state authorities did not react after the request of the AFA for the release of spaces on the perimeter of the National Stadium, we request urgent response to these structures. “The cancellation of the Albania-England match would have catastrophic consequences for the image of our country, the National Team and in general for Albanian Football.” An FA spokesman responded: “We are aware of the reports and continue liaising with the Albanian authorities.” Earlier this week the Albanian FA asked the country’s prime minister to have around 30 percent of seats, around 6 500 fans, inside the ground if they had been vaccinated but the request was turned down. It is estimated that around 50,000 Albanians have been jabbed against Covid but despite the refusal, another last-minute bid was being made to the government. While the FA was aware of an issue in Albania after the country’s PM pledged to try to allow fans into the ground on Sunday, Wembley bosses were surprised to be told of the latest row. Despite that promise, the England hierarchy believe the match will be played behind closed doors — if it does go ahead. SunSport understands talks are progressing between the relevant parties for the issues to be resolved while the State Police have given assurances they are taking all measures for the game to go ahead safely. – The Sun