The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
SIXTEEN murder cases and 65 rape cases were reported in the Midlands province in the past two months. Some of the people were killed over petty issues like misunderstandings over relish and fighting over gold ore and claims by artisanal miners. Seventy percent of the rape victims were abused by relatives or people known to them. The home environment is now proving to be a dangerous place for females, both young and old according to the figures.
All the reported cases are now before the courts. The statistics were revealed by Midlands Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Larry Mavima during the Zanu-PF Provincial Coordinating Committee (PCC) meeting held at the Winery Convention Centre in Gweru on Saturday. “We are worried about the surge in rape cases in the province. In the month of January alone, the province recorded 49 rape cases and in February 16 cases were reported. Comrades I would like to appeal to all of you as the leadership of the Midlands province to play your part in eliminating these vices from our communities,” he said. Minister Mavima said 70 percent of the rape cases were perpetrated by people known to the victims that include relatives. “There is a need to make the home environment safe for females especially the girls,” he said. Minister Mavima encouraged people facing any form of abuse to quickly report perpetrators to the police so that they are brought to book.
He said 10 murders were reported in January and six in February. Minister Mavima said some of the reasons for the murders were shocking such as disputes over relish or beer. He said most of the murders could have been avoided by engaging and solving disputes amicably. Minister Mavima said eight people were killed in road traffic accidents in January and February and urged motorists to observe traffic rules and regulations. “Let’s work together to curb road accidents,” he said. The Minister of Women’s Affairs, Community, Small and Medium Enterprises Development, Dr Sithembiso Nyoni, told the National Assembly recently that 2 496 rape cases were reported during the second half of 2020. She said 4 959 girls fell pregnant while 1 774 young girls were forced into marriages since the onset of the Covid-19 induced national lockdown last year. “May I take this opportunity to also update the House on some of the legislative issues which my Ministry is working on which we think will contribute towards prevention. “The first one is the Sexual Harassment Bill and Gender Equality Bill. The Ministry received a set of draft principles for the Sexual Harassment Bill and Gender Equality Bill from the Zimbabwe Gender Commission. “The Bills are expected to criminalise the offence of sexual harassment and provide frameworks for gender equality.” Minister Nyoni said as part of the law development process, consultations on the Bills with law based women’s organisations at national and regional levels are at an advanced. Principles of the two Bills are expected to be submitted to Cabinet before May. Sexual harassment is considered an “unfair labour practice” under the Labour Act and an employer can be held liable for civil remedies.
The Act prohibits asking for sexual favours for the recruitment for employment, improvement of the remuneration or other conditions of employment of the employee.