The Chronicle Chronicle Reporter
MORE than 35 000 frontline workers had been vaccinated across the country as of Wednesday this week. On the same day no single death was recorded and 20 new cases, all local cases, were recorded in the country. The recovery rate stood at 93,4 percent and active cases were down to 899. A total of 35 901 frontline workers have been vaccinated and Government has since said the second phase of the vaccination programme can now start. “As of March 9 at 3PM, there were 122 hospitalised, asymptomatic 76, mild to moderate cases 24, severe 19 and three in intensive care units,” reads an update from the Ministry of Health and Child Care. This comes at a time the Medicines Control Authority of Zimbabwe (MCAZ) has approved the use of Sinopharm and Sinovac from China, Covaxin from India and Russia’s Sputnik V for use in the country. During a post-Cabinet briefing on Tuesday, Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa said all those intending to procure vaccines for their employees must procure only registered vaccines in Zimbabwe. “Cabinet would also like to unveil the guidelines for the procurement and administration of Covid-19 vaccines by the private sector in Zimbabwe. Following wide ranging consultations with the private sector, the following guidelines will be followed:
All Covid-19 approved vaccines will be procured through the National Vaccine Procurement Fund managed by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development,” said the Minister. “Organisations, individuals and any partners wishing to donate towards vaccine procurement will do so to the President through the Fund. Donations received and pledges made to date will be announced.” Minister Mutsvangwa said those interested in buying vaccines for their workforce will deposit their funds into the National Vaccine Procurement Fund after approval by the Ministry of Health and Child Care. “The National Vaccine Procurement Fund will procure on behalf of the organisations guided by the national procurement guidelines. To ensure safety and efficacy, vaccines shall be kept at the Central Vaccines Stores under the Ministry of Health and Child Care and the National Cold Chain guidelines shall apply. Only trained and registered health professionals shall be authorised to administer vaccines, and only the Ministry of Health and Child Care shall be responsible for issuing all Covid-19 vaccination certificates.