The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent REDCLIFF Town Council has set aside ZW$375 million for the construction of a water reticulation plant as part of the local authority’s efforts to ease water problems. The Government recently approved Redcliff’s ZW$1,6 billion for year 2021 and on top of its priorities is water reticulation. The town is currently getting water from its sister town, Kwekwe City Council which has increased tariffs by more than 500 percent. Recently, Redcliff constructed a water pump to ensure water access to higher ground areas in the mountainous town, which had not received portable water for over a decade. To further improve the water situation, the town seeks to rehabilitate to construct a water treatment plant. Acting Town Clerk, Mr Nyararai Gomba, confirmed that the budget had been approved and that water was its major priority. “Our budget was recently approved and we are targeting to construct a water treatment plant. We have set aside $375 million for that project as well as to rehabilitate the Rutendo sewer line,” said Mr Gomba. Amongst other major projects, the local authority also seeks to purchase equipment like a grader, refuse compactor and tipper truck to the tune of $297 million. Servicing of schemes in Rutendo Extension, Grasslands and Englebrecht suburbs are also part of key allocations. Resuscitation of income generating projects like brick molding and garment and masking is expected to raise $180 million. The local authority has also set aside $77 million for road rehabilitation. “This comes as the rains have damaged most of our roads and in line with the Government’s decision to declare the roads a state of disaster, we have decided to set a substantial amount aside for the road repairs. “This amount is meant to reconstruct the Idah Samson road and repair roads in Simbi Park, which were heavily affected by the rains,” said Mr Gomba. Redcliff’s water problems emanated from the demise of Ziscosteel, which used to receive water from Kwekwe, purify it before distributing it to residents and companies. The water treatment plant, once completed, will receive raw water from Kwekwe, purify it before distributing to residents and companies. Currently, the local authority is contributing towards purchasing water treatment chemicals by Kwekwe council.  