The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
ECOLOGISTS and tourism operators in an around Hwange District have expressed concern about widespread vandalism of solar powered water pumping equipment in wildlife sanctuaries. Hundreds of solar panels, batteries and other equipment such as water pumps running into several thousands of dollars was reportedly stolen by thieves suspected to be part of syndicates comprising locals and foreigners from neighbouring Botswana and Zambia. Affected areas are greater Hwange National Park including Sinamatela and Robins Camp on the edge of the park, Chamabondo and Zambezi National Park in Victoria Falls as well as Matetsi Unit 6 and 7 in Kazungula area. Schools, clinics and boreholes in communities around Hwange District have also been affected after solar panels donated by various organisations have been vandalised especially during the lockdown which started in March last year. In Matetsi area alone, more than 120 solar panels were stolen in the last 17 months while in Hwange National Park a number have been stolen as well. While the wild is saturated with water at the moment due to incessant rains that have been falling in the country, thousands of wild animals may be affected by drought during the dry season as a result of lack of water if the infrastructure is not repaired. This will affect tourism. Tourism operators and wildlife organisations have for years been involved in wildlife and environment conservation and community development which include water infrastructure. Some of the organisations are Bhejane Trust, Victoria Falls Wildlife Trust, Wild is Life, Friends of Wilderness and others. In an interview Mr Trever Lane from Bhejane Trust bemoaned vandalism of water infrastructure in wildlife sanctuaries. “The situation is really bad because a lot of panels have been stolen. The problem is everywhere in Matetsi, Sinamatela, Robins area, Zambezi National Park and Hwange Main Camp. In the areas that we operate in 46 solar units were vandalised and the damage runs into several thousands of dollars. This has a huge implication as it will reduce water availability to wildlife if the panels are not replaced. Wild animals will go without water thereby affecting tourism and conservation,” he said. Mr Lane called for concerted efforts by operators and security in Zimbabwe, Zambia and Botswana. Chairperson for the Association for Tourism Hwange (ATH), Mrs Elisabeth Pasalk-Valerio who is the proprietor of Gwango Elephant Lodge and Heritage Resort said as conservationists and operators they will remain committed to protecting wildlife despite the criminal elements. As tourism operators we remain highly committed to keeping the park safe. Seeing the cases, our anti-poaching units and rangers went on the ground and we do have many safeguards now from all stakeholders so that it becomes difficult for people to tamper with or vandalise infrastructure,” she said. Police could not readily comment on the matter as Matabeleland North spokesperson Inspector Glory Banda was not reachable on his mobile phone. However, the Chronicle gathered that no arrests have been made so far although the police have reacted to most of the reported incidents. Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Management Authority (Zimparks) spokesperson Mr Tinashe Farawo recently said solar panels worth more than US$50 000 had been stolen within the game park. Zimparks last year offered US$2 500 as reward for information leading to recovery of the panels and apprehension of suspects. The game park is home to wild animals such as elephants, giraffes, lions, zebras and several other species while private sanctuaries also have rhinos and draw tourists from around the world. The game park uses borehole water and about 90 percent are solar powered and were donated by development partners. In 2018, national parks received 957 752 tourists making a significant contribution to the economy. — @ncubeleon