The Chronicle Midlands Bureau Chief
MIDLANDS Province is on course to meeting a target of 400 000 tonnes of maize following good rains. Government delivered inputs for under Pfumvudza/Intwasa as well as Presidential Input Support Scheme well on time which saw farmers preparing well for the season. In an interview, the Minister of State for Midlands Provincial Affairs and Devolution Larry Mavima said despite the challenges of shortages of AN fertiliser, delays in input disbursements for command agriculture and excessive rainfall, the province is still confident that it can meet its target of 400 000 tonnes. “There is a good crop in Gokwe South and North, Kwekwe, Shurugwi, parts of Zvishavane and Mberengwa. Expected yields range between 3-7tonnes per ha for conventional farming and 12-15 tonnes per ha for commercial farming signifying food security,” he said. Minister Mavima said the Intwasa/Pfumvudza programme is a roaring success as 285 482 households adopted it against the target of 275 000. “A total of 440 520 plots has been planted of the 285 482 households who established plots. The maize crop is in good condition and some are at the late vegetative stage. We are therefore anticipating a surplus of grain as a province,” he said. Minister Mavima said Government is also distributing mealie-meal to vulnerable households in the province under social welfare department. Meanwhile, Government has released more than $35 million to the Midlands Province for the rehabilitation of roads that were destroyed by heavy rains. The rainy season has this year left a trail of destruction across the country. Cabinet has approved an Emergency Road Rehabilitation Programme and has budgeted US$400 million to finance corrective, preventive and restoration works over the next 36 months. In an interview, the Minister of State for Midlands Provincial Affairs and Devolution Larry Mavima said most roads in the province, especially in rural areas, were in bad shape. “We have received $37,5million for the Emergency Road Rehabilitation Programme in Midlands province through the District Development Fund,” he said. Minister Mavima said the DDF has since launched the road rehabilitation programme with works in Chachacha and Shurugwi. He said Gokwe is one of the province’s top priority areas as some areas are no longer accessible. “Some of the roads that will be attended to include Muroyeshi in Gokwe North, Mandisharara in Gokwe South and the Zhombe-Lahleka road in Kwekwe only to mention but a few as all the affected areas will be attended to across the province,” he said.
On agriculture, Minister Mavima said a total of 253 712ha out of a target of 302 506ha has been planted in the 2020/21 cropping season.