The Chronicle Boitumelo Makhurane, Chronicle Reporter
BULAWAYO Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Judith Ncube on Friday implored residents to embrace the national clean-up campaign to ensure the city has sustainable environment management and waste disposal systems. President Mnangagwa declared that the first Friday of every month between 8AM and 10AM should be dedicated to the national clean-up exercise. In Bulawayo, Environment Management Agency (Ema) officials, Zimbabwe National Army (ZNA) and other stakeholders participated in the clean-up in the city centre on Friday. Addressing participants, Minister Ncube said there is a need for community engagement for the public to fully engage in the clean-up exercise. “People should take ownership of this programme. It must never be our programme as Government because it benefits the whole community and Zimbabwe at large,” she said. Minister Ncube said Government has started the journey towards adopting a circular economy which involves waste recycling for future use. “Zimbabwe has already started the journey towards attaining circularity. Adopting a circular economy will reduce the continued use of disposable plastics such as cups, packaging shopping bags while encouraging the use of better alternatives such as re-usable shopping bags,” she said. The minister also urged local authorities to invest in biogas technology and provide adequate waste bins at strategic sites to curb public littering. Minister Ncube noted that there has been a relative improvement in terms of cleanliness in the city since the launch of the programme by President Mnangagwa in 2018. “At the start of the programme we were picking a lot of used diapers but of late we have discovered that this is changing. The areas are becoming much cleaner. Some community members are becoming more conscious about their surroundings. But we need to put more effort,” she said. The minister lauded residents for participating in the clean-up campaign. She said she has engaged the local authority so that it can organise meetings to teach residents about the importance of having cleaner environments through participating in the national clean-up campaign. “We want to create a sense of ownership regarding the clean-up exercise. Residents should understand that the environments that are being cleaned are theirs. We should encourage them to participate in the activities,” she said. “I would like to thank you all for sparing time to be part of this noble exercise to clean the city and working towards attaining the 2030 vision by our President.”