The Chronicle Judge Jarachara, Chronicle Reporter
MAJOR supermarkets in Bulawayo have run out of fresh milk and by yesterday only a few retail outlets had imported milk from South Africa on the shelves. For weeks now, only imported milk was on the shelves of selected supermarkets. Confederation of Retailers Association of Zimbabwe President Mr Denford Mutashu confirmed the shortage of the commodity which he said is due to constrained supply issues. “I can confirm that there is a shortage of milk across the country and this is due to constrained supply issues that we strongly believe the suppliers are working on,” he said. A snap survey conducted in the city’s Central Business District revealed that major supermarkets did not have fresh milk. At OK Zimbabwe Jason Moyo branch, there were only a few one-litre bottles of fresh milk. TM Pick n Pay, Choppies Bulawayo Centre and TM Jason Moyo, all did not have the commodity. A manager at one of the local supermarkets who preferred to speak on the condition of anonymity said they are also worried about the shortage. “The shortage is worrisome for us retailers. For me it’s been two weeks now since I last received milk consignment especially the 400ml. The shortage is a big blow to us as it affects our sales besides disappointing customers,” he said. Consumers who spoke to Chronicle said the shortage started some weeks ago. They said they suspected some retailers were hoarding the commodity to create artificial shortages with the intention to trigger price increases. Mr Malvin Sibanda (64) said the shortage was an artificial one aiming to trigger price hikes. “It is surprising that milk has become scarce here in Zimbabwe. It is the first time we are witnessing this and I would like to believe that these retailers are hoarding the commodity in order to increase the prices,” said Mr Sibanda. Mr Mutashu appealed to retailers to ensure that whatever little they get should be shared so that s many customers access the commodity. “Those who still have the milk should ensure it is distributed to as many outlets as possible so that customers get the milk. I also urge them to maintain affordable prices and not take advantage of the situation to increase prices,” he said. Mr Mutashu appealed to milk suppliers to urgently address the problem.