The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
THE business community has lauded Government for further relaxing lockdown measures, saying this is a step in the right direction in opening up the economy. Announcing the relaxation of the lockdown on Monday, President Mnangagwa said citizens no longer required exemption letters for movement while intercity travel is now permissible with businesses including the informal sector allowed to operate up to 7PM. While the extension is meant to consolidate containment of the viral infection, widening business hours is expected to boost economic activity in the country. The curfew, which previously ran from 8PM to 5.30AM was adjusted and is now from 10PM to 5.30AM. Under the level four lockdown regulations, gatherings at funerals are still restricted to 30 people and public gatherings shall not exceed 50 people. Beerhalls, bars, night clubs and gymnasiums will remain closed while restaurants and bottle stores must strictly operate takeaways. The Confederation of Zimbabwe Retailers president Mr Denford Mutashu said the review of the lockdown was balanced in terms of allowing the economy to open up while also focusing on fighting the Covid-19 pandemic. “The measured lockdown extension has eased business operations and CZR is of the strong view that this will play a significant role in injecting life into various businesses,” he said. Mr Mutashu said the fact that exemption letters were no longer required is a great move towards smoothening movement of essential service providers and goods and services. He said the reopening of bottle stores serving only takeaways was sweet news to imbibers and is very strategic in saving operations of breweries and the more than 20 000 bottles across the country whose employees were getting retrenched. “Small to Medium Enterprises (SMEs) and food markets will now open guided by WHO (World Health Organisation) protocols but CZR is of the belief that there is need for relevant ministries to be proactive and set out these guidelines as more failed to reopen despite the President announcing same in the previous lockdown,” said Mr Mutashu. Going forward, he said there is need to operationalise a stimulus package for informal sector and SMEs who have been closed for a long time as some used up their capital to keep them going during lockdown. Political Actors Dialogue economic committee chairman Mr Trust Chikohora who is also the Zimbabwe National Chamber of Commerce president said: “President Mnangagwa has made sweeping changes to the lockdown regulations which will see an improvement in economic activity and quality of life. “Virtually all businesses can now open while adhering to Covid-19 regulations in the new normal.” He said the latest regulations for instance, business can now close at 7pm and curfew is now from 10PM to 5.30AM was what they have been advocating for, for a long time. “It will see the economy beginning to start ticking in the right direction. Informal sector players who form the bulk of the economy can also now get back to business while observing the Covid-19 protocols. So, livelihoods will be impacted positively,” said Mr Chikohora. The Employers Confederation of Zimbabwe president Dr Israel Murefu echoed similar sentiments adding that due to the Covid-19 nuisance, as a country, Zimbabwe has lost two months if not more of productive time this year. “We have lost two months if not more of productive time and I don’t think that the projections which had been made by various authorities which point to positive economic growth will be achieved. “If we are to have a positive economic growth projection, it will be very low. “However, the relaxation of the lockdown regulations is a positive move and this is what we have been advocating for as industry to say can we have businesses and companies operating while we are maintaining strict lockdown measures,” he said. — @okazunga