The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
THE Postal and Telecommunications Regulatory Authority of Zimbabwe (Potraz) says the country’s mobile data tariffs are within the regional benchmarks. The authority has dismissed social media reports suggesting that the country has the most expensive tariffs in Africa. Some were claiming that 1 Gigabyte (GB) of data was pegged at US$75,20. This is misleading and deceptive information, said Potraz. It noted that the claims were emanating from a study done in 2019 by howmuch.net that was published on a United Kingdom website. “Potraz would like to advise the public to ignore a misleading infographic circulating on social media that is portraying Zimbabwe as having the most expensive data tariffs in Africa, with 1GB of mobile data costing US$75,20. “The circulated infographic is outdated and inaccurate as it does not reflect the true state of affairs during 2019 as well as what is obtaining now in Zimbabwe and other Sadc countries,” said the regulator. It said data collected from the Country Reports of the Communication Regulators’ Association of Southern Africa (CRASA) for 2019, reveals that the tariffs for mobile data that were used for comparison purposes in the deceptive study, are not in sync with charges that were obtaining in some Sadc countries in 2019. Against what was portrayed by the cable United Kingdom website, Potraz said in 2019, the cost of 1GB out of bundle mobile data tariffs including taxes in Zimbabwe was US$15,50. According to CRASA, in 2019 the cost of 1GB in South Africa was pegged at US$11 against US7, 19 that portrayed by howmuch.net. In Botswana, for instance, 1GB out of bundle mobile data tariffs including taxes was at US$9 compared to US$15,12 released by the UK-based organisation. In Lesotho, the cost of 1GB out of bundle mobile data tariffs in 2019 was pegged at US$22 against US$2,43 portrayed by howmuch.net while in Mozambique it was US$13 against US$15,83 by the cable UK website. “It is glaring that the circulating report is flawed and not reflective of the true situation on the ground. “Accordingly, this report must be dismissed with the disgust and contempt it deserves by a nation that is seeking to find its economic space in the world, through attracting investment into the country,” said Potraz. Furthermore, the postal and telecommunications regulator said it was pertinent to disclose that the same UK-based organisation conducted another study in 2020, which is published on their website www.cable.co.uk. The 2020 study excluded Zimbabwe due to confusion and problems with currency and exchange rate conversions on the part of the researchers, which did not allow for meaningful comparison. “This could have been the same problem that gave the wrong prices for data for Zimbabwe in the 2019 survey,” said Potraz. As a way forward, Potraz said it has done computations using the official exchange rate in order to compare with results from the 2020 study published on the cable.co.uk website. “The computations show that retail mobile data tariffs in Zimbabwe are relatively cheaper and comparable within the Sadc region and beyond,” said Potraz. The regulator indicated that the cheapest mobile data bundle tariffs in Zimbabwe averaged US$5,20 while the most expensive price per Gig was US$9,60. In comparison to other Sadc countries, the cheapest data in South Africa was pegged at US$4,30 and the most expensive averaged US$30,47. For the cheapest data in Angola it costs US$5,29 and an average of US$10 for the most expensive data. “It is clear that mobile Internet or data tariffs in Zimbabwe are relatively cheaper and comparable to those obtaining within the Sadc region. “Potraz would like to assure the nation of its commitment to continue enhancing data affordability for all citizens while at the same time ensuring operator viability. “This is a delicate balance that requires concerted effort, including fiscal intervention to address declining disposable incomes,” it said.