The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
GWANDA-based up-and-coming kwaito artiste, Proficience “Kadder” Cadder has set up an arts academy named Planet Kadder Academy (PKA) through which she is nurturing children in arts. The academy which has 14 children so far, was officially registered with the National Arts Council of Zimbabwe last year. Its mandate is to conduct grooming lessons in poetry, modelling, acting, choral music and drum majorettes. Kadder said her goal is to unleash raw talent so that she equips the youngsters in order for them to become brands. She said she has come up with plans for the year which she hopes to execute successfully. Among these is the introduction of the youngsters to audiences through various events she has lined up. “We intend to establish the academy in a way that’ll see us grooming the future of Gwanda art. The plan is to launch programmes like the Baby Gwanda online competition, the Sunday Listening Sessions, Abantwana Child Festival, Jahunda Youth Festival, Abangane Cultural Exchange Program as well as the PlaKa Writing Competition. Through these concepts, we’ll equip the youngsters while exposing them to audiences as we work on making them brands,” said Kadder. She said as a community-based organisation, they want to strengthen the idea of art being regarded as a vital component in economy development. “We intend to engage the community in our activities as this is a community-based initiative. The other vision is to sell branded products for visibility and to strengthen the idea that art can contribute greatly towards economic growth. Vision 2021 is basically establishment.” Narrating how she established the academy, Kadder said it was through her encounter with renowned producer, writer and director, Butshilo Nleya who challenged her to solidify her brand. “In 2013, Butshilo Nleya offered me the post of Bulawayo Culture Festival administrator after I successfully co-ordinated the Support Local Musicians initiative. He then tasked me to come up with a five-year vision for my Kadder brand. “The main parts included forming an institution that would focus on grooming children in art as well as giving back to my community of Gwanda, my birth place,” she said. “I’ve always been passionate about working with children as I’ve been training drum majorettes since 2012. I also had the opportunity to groom a young group named AmaGoomGedlela that managed to record and perform at festivals. “So coming up with an academy dedicated to kids wasn’t difficult.” — @mthabisi_mthire.