The Chronicle ZIMBABWE are touring the United Arab Emirates (UAE) to face Afghanistan in the Test and T20I series, which will run between tomorrow and March 20. During this tour, Afghanistan and Zimbabwe will play a two-match Test series, with the first starting tomorrow and the second set for March 10. While both these teams are not part of the inaugural ICC World Test Championship, there is no chance for this Test series to be a part of this Test Championship. After completion of the Test series, Afghanistan and Zimbabwe will face each other in three-match T20I series from March 17 to March 20. This will be the first international cricket assignment for Zimbabwe since November 2020 when they toured Pakistan. Meanwhile, Afghanistan have already played two limited-overs series this year, but will be playing their first Test since November 2019 when they faced West Indies in India. They have eight uncapped players, Bahir Shah Mohboob, Fazal Haq Farooqi, Sayed Ahmed Shirzad, Abdul Malik, Munir Ahmad Kakar, Shahidullah Kamal, Saleem Safi and Zia Ur Rahman Akbar, in their squad. Rahmat Shah has scored 298 runs for Afghanistan in Test cricket at an average of 37 and a strike rate of 53. Asghar Afghan has also scored 249 runs at an average of 35. Rashid Khan has picked up 23 wickets for Afghanistan in tests at an economy rate of 3.10 and a strike rate of 40, but may be unavailable due to a finger injury. Yamin Ahmadzai has 10 wickets from 4 tests. Zimbabwe have the uncapped Wesley Madhevere in the Test squad. The young 15-member squad also includes 23-year-old Richard Ngarava, Blessing Muzarabani and Brandon Mavuta, who are both 24. Sikandar Raza has scored 648 runs for Zimbabwe in his last nine Test matches at an average of 36 and a strike rate of 51, while Sean Williams has also scored 509 runs at an average of 39. Raza has picked up 26 wickets in tests at an economy rate of 3.11 and Williams has 15 wickets from seven tests.
Squads Afghanistan: Asghar Afghan (c), Ibrahim Zadran, Javed Ahmadi, Rahmat Shah, Hashmatullah Shahidi, Afsar Zazai, Nasir Jamal, Abdul Malik, Munir Ahmad Kakar, Shahidullah Kamal, Bahir Shah Mohboob, Rashid Khan, Amir Hamza, Fazal Haq Farooqi, Sayed Ahmad Shirzad, Saleem Safi, Wafadar Momand, Zia Ur Rahman Akbar, Yamin Ahmadzai Zimbabwe: Sean Williams (c), Ryan Burl, Sikandar Raza, Regis Chakabva, Kevin Kasuza, Wessely Madhevere, Wellington Masakadza, Prince Masvaure, Brandon Mavuta, Tarisai Musakanda, Richmond Mutumbami, Blessing Muzarabani, Richard Ngarava, Victor Nyauchi, Donald Tiripano
— Cricket World