The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
In most cases, artistes from the Matabeleland region have taken a back seat each time an opportunity has been availed to them as they likely underrate themselves. However, for Gwanda-based hip hop musicians Zie the Artist (real name Zibusiso Tshuma) and Kuda Kay (real name Kudakwashe Kagudu), this has not been the case. The duo did not let their roots cloud their vision as they held their heads high and took up the opportunity to be part of the national Chimurenga Music competition that was held last year. Through a remix of Chitungwiza Mbira Unity’s Zimbabwe Yakauya Nehondo, the artistes took second place and won a car and ZWL$81 000 (equivalent to US$1 000) after their rendition outshone over 700 songs. Their winning song is set to get a video produced and be featured on the Chimurenga Music compilation. This feat is a clear sign that artistes from the Matabeleland region should get out of their comfort zone and unleash those hidden talents they possess. So, what is next for the duo? The win for them was a stage of a child shifting from crawling to being able to stand and walk by themselves. Zie The Artist, 22, who is a musician, painter, producer and songwriter said they shared half the winning prize money and he is looking to buy studio equipment with his portion, sentiments alluded to by Kuda Kay. Narrating his career, Zie The Artist said he is mostly focused on hip hop although his sound is influenced by other genres like gospel, mbaqanga and some western genres. “I started doing music at a tender age of nine years where I used to play the piano. I’m also a producer and have worked with the likes of Zhezhingtonz and DJDrumz. I’ve produced a number of songs that have made it to Skyz Metro FM, Khulumani FM, Swaziland FM and Power FM,” he said. Zie the Artiste said he is working on music that he hopes to release this year. Kuda Kay who is a 21-year-old music producer and aspiring audio engineer started his journey as a music producer in 2018. “I’ve been working hand in hand with Zie the Artist and have produced songs for the likes of Zagoe Radge and Pamela, only to mention a few. “I’m planning to set up my studio with the winning money and churn out hit after hit, in the process promoting local artistes,” Kuda Kay said. -@mthabisi_mthire.