The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Forget Living the Dream with Somizi and Being Bonang as a local, Braydan Heart is preparing to premiere the second season of his reality show, Being Braydan. The first season which was piloted in 2019 was shown online as well as the National Arts Gallery of Zimbabwe in Bulawayo. It is currently showing on Play Afrika tv for those who missed it. Being Braydan is a reality show that is centred on the lifestyle of Braydan Heart and his friends. The first season which saw Braydan sharing his champagne lifestyle featured John Mombeshora, Nkosilathi Mukuze with cameo appearances from Mitchelle Chikwengo. The cast will have new additions in the form of Meluleki Sikhosana and Mayenzeke Mpofu. The star yesterday said he is preparing to release the second season between April and May. He said it will be an interesting 10 episodes. While people watched the first season free of charge, Braydan said the second will be available on YouTube on payable online streaming platforms and a satellite network channel to be revealed soon. “Our season two is currently in its final stages of production,” he said. “This season won’t be made available for free on YouTube like the previous season as it will air on a Satellite TV and also on an online subscription-based streaming platform like Netflix. “The respective distributing networks will be revealed close to the premiere date which also hasn’t been finalised. But it’ll be between April and May.” He said the forthcoming season will have eight episodes and a two-part special episode as a reunion making them 10 episodes. “This season will feature a few different faces hence the cast will be a bit different from the previous season. I can assure audiences that we’ll be bringing twice the mess, drama and entertainment. “The setting will still be in the City of Kings and Queens throughout the whole season,” said Braydan. Through the reality show, Braydan Heart, a film producer, navigates the streets of his hometown of Bulawayo trying to discover himself. Determined to make it in the creative industry, he and his friends go through eachday with different battles and developments that force underlying conflicts to rise to the surface. The group of friends goes through everyday problems just like any other person with the only difference being that they are not just any other Bulawayo kids, they definitely see the world differently and the city is their playground. -@mthabisi_mthire.