The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
MVUMA District Development Coordinator (DDC), Mr Vafias Hlabati has been arrested on allegations of criminal abuse of office. Hlabati who has since been suspended pending investigations, was arrested together with Mvuma District agriculture extension officer Caristo Nobert Masiiwa and Grain Marketing Board district manager Tawanda Mutsavi. Hlabati (56), Mutsavi and Masiiwa (45), have since appeared in court and were remanded to April 21 on $10 000 bail each. Midlands provincial police spokesperson Inspector Emmanuel Mahoko confirmed the incident. “Zimbabwe Republic Police (ZRP) confirms that Mvuma DDC, Vafias Hlabati aged 56 years and district agriculture extension officer Caristo Nobert Masiwa (45) were arrested on 22 March on allegations of theft as defined in Section 113 (2) (d) and criminal abuse of office as defined in section 174 (a) (b)(3) of the Criminal Law Codification and reform Act Chapter 9,23,” said Inspector Mahoko. Although no further information could be obtained, a police report alleges that the trio was part of a racket that misused presidential inputs. The trio allegedly sold fertiliser among other inputs that were meant to be distributed to farmers in the district. The inputs were sold to John Mataruse at US$24 per bag. The report further says that Mataruse made a US$888 payment to Dakati who later handed the money to Mutsavi. Government has declared zero tolerance for corruption. A number of people have been arrested for corruption, with some assets being seized. President Mnangagwa is on record saying he is aware that some Government departments have a tendency of grossly inflating prices of essential capital goods to the detriment of the ordinary people, who have been going without services, but that will not be tolerated. “My Government will not tolerate such filthy, criminal and greedy tendencies. Let us all put the needs of the generality of our people first and undertake our responsibilities professionally and in the national interest,” he said.