The Chronicle Prosper Ndlovu, Business Editor
THE Zimbabwe International Trade Fair (ZITF) Company board chairman, Mr Busisa Moyo, says it is important to foster inclusivity in the messaging of updates leading to this year’s biggest annual trade expo, which is set for July. This would be achieved through regular updates in local languages as part of efforts to ensure comprehensive buy in from all Zimbabweans. Mr Moyo, who is also the chief executive officer of Bulawayo-headquartered United Refineries Limited, has already issued public updates in English, Ndebele, Shona and Kalanga, announcing new ZITF dates and encouraging all stakeholders to prepare for the event. “Covid-19 has taught us that we don’t only look to connect outwards but also inwards. The ZITF is an international event but hosted by locals,” he told Business Chronicle. “We must all buy in so that investors and trading partners from the region and the world at large enjoy Zimbabwean hospitality from everyone of us and so all languages must hear the message. “Silabantu bemzini. Tina vaenzi. Tina bezi!” This year the country’s biggest annual trade expo will run for four days instead of five, under tight Covid-19 mitigation protocols after it was suspended last year following the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic. Bulawayo would host the exhibition at the usual venue, the Zimbabwe International Exhibition Centre, from 20 to 23 July 2021 under the theme, “Showcasing the New Normal for Business & Industry: Realities and Opportunities”. Mr Moyo said efforts would be made to also issue updates is Sotho and Nambya among other 16 recognised indigenous languages. Unlike during the colonial era when only three languages — IsiNdebele, Shona and English were prioritised, Zimbabwe has fostered the use of 16 languages including sign language to cater for citizens with disabilities. Previously dubbed the minority languages, some of the languages have even made it to public Grade Seven examinations and some of these are being studied up to degree level. The recognition of diverse languages in the country’s constitution has enabled every citizen to take part in the development of the country and benefit fully from national programmes.