The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Chronicle Reporter
ZANU-PF Bulawayo Women’s League has commended President Mnangagwa for his visionary empowerment programmes that have equipped them with income-generating projects which include the production of face masks. Part of the projects which have been essential in helping women feed their families include the production of petroleum jelly, pine gel, fruit jam, washing soap and detergents. The projects have also helped women remain resilient even during economic challenges which have been worsened by the global pandemic. So far Bulawayo women have managed to produce more than 8 000 masks which have been distributed among members of the public.
Speaking during a meeting at Davies Hall yesterday, Politburo member Cde Angeline Masuku said it was paramount for every woman to join hands in fighting poverty. She said politics was never about chanting slogans while people continue languishing in poverty but about grabbing every opportunity to improve one’s livelihood. She also called for unity and love to prevail in communities even during the pandemic which has left many people in need of socio-economic support. “We are gathered here to update each other on how we have managed to progress in terms of using our hands to feed families which is part of Vision 2030. We need to keep busy as women and continue participating in these projects so that we fend for our families,” she said. “We are grateful to President Mnangagwa for the leadership and the constant encouragement that he gives to keep us on our toes and forever working towards the development of this country.” Cde Masuku said the pandemic should also be a constant reminder that women need income-generating projects so they are able to sustain families even during tough times. “I call on every woman to join forces with us, train and also trade their goods so that we empower each other and fight poverty using every strength in us as ladies. We also need to remain united as Zimbabwean women so that we are able to build a better and peaceful Zimbabwe,” she added. The Bulawayo Women’s League chairperson Ms Rebecca Manjere said after receiving the material from President Mnangagwa, the office had produced masks which are distributed in different wards around Bulawayo. She said part of beneficiaries are vendors who are at risk of contracting the disease given their interaction with members of the public. “We are very grateful for the gift we got from our president as we know that masks are on demand and many popes did not have access. So far we have made around 8 000 which we have distributed around different wards,” said Ms Manjere. “We will continue producing more masks as we still have material and then encourage more women to come and join us in producing these goods which are a clever way of making that extra dollar to help us make a living.”