The Chronicle Kusile Madlela
“I am going to release more than a 100 tracks this year as I want my music to live forever.” This was the declaration made by house music producer and DJ, Mdu Sevan (real name Mduduzi Ngoma) last week on his Facebook account. This declaration was met with all sorts of reactions and likely tweaked a few egos in the corridors of the music genre. The artiste whose house/gqom song Uyangithanda was a hit last year, went on to add that he has released 11 songs so far. Six of them have made the top five on the Skyz Metro FM Bulawayo House charts. “I have been on the number one spot four times and at one point with two singles in the top five at the same time. Every day, I am in the studio producing and currently, I have over 200 unreleased tracks. “I am inspired and driven by events in my life, even a fly can trigger me to work on something!” said Mdu Sevan. The producer also urged music lovers to brace themselves for what he has to offer as his music will keep coming till the end of the year. “I do not feel any pressure or competition when it comes to production as I am doing what comes almost natural to me,” he said. Having attended Soulcandi Institute of Music in South Africa, Mdu Sevan said he has been involved with music from an early age. “My involvement in choir singing laid the foundation for my music career. Having grown up in Barbourfields doing street rap that was heavily influenced by the likes of Tupac and B.I.G, I managed to form musical groups. I then attended Soulcandi Institute of Music in South Africa and that was my stepping stone to professional music production and deejaying,” narrated the producer. Not limited to one genre, the DJ said he can produce various beats be it RnB or hip hop although he is passionate about house music. “I can produce virtually anything, but my first love is house music. I also love film scoring (soundtracks for film) and have scored for movies like Liabilities of love (Zambezi Magic), Tjukutja kasi to kasi (ZBC) and many other local short films.” Mdu Sevan who has collaborated with and produced for the likes of Qeqeshiwe, Thandeka, Sister Flame, Quincy and Qvino added that mixing and mastering are his strong points. The artiste however implored local radio stations to support Deep house by playing it regularly as the genre is big although most stations seem to be shunning it. He said he knows the genre is big because of the huge patronage at deep house events popularly known as chillas that are held in Bulawayo.