The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
CROATIAN Football Federation head of communications Tomislav Pacak said Warriors head coach Zdravko Logarušic got his Uefa Pro licence in 2013. Rumours had been doing the rounds last week that Zifa was investigating the Croat for alleged possession of a fraudulent Uefa Pro coaching badge after his alleged leaked application to the Kenyan Football Federation in which he promises to work towards attaining a Uefa Pro licence. Chronicle Sport sent an email to the CFF on Wednesday asking to be furnished with a list of Uefa Pro Licence coaches that graduated in 2013. Pacak responded saying CFF cannot share the list of coaches that graduated in 2013 due to personal data protection and internal acts, but “we can hereby confirm that Mr Zdravko Logarušic earned his Uefa Pro licence in 2013 at the Croatian Football Federation Football Academy and his badge is valid until 30 June 2021”. Pacak confirmed Logarušic was a 2013 Uefa Pro licence graduate. Chronicle Sport then contacted a Croatian coach (name withheld) working in Oman, who graduated with his Uefa Pro licence badge in 2013, who said he only got to know about Logarušic after the Warriors’ qualification for the Afcon finals. “To be honest I don’t know him personally, I have never met him, but I just got to know about his name when your country (Zimbabwe) qualified for the continental finals,” said the coach, who revealed that his 2013 class had former Bayen Munich coach Nika Kovak, who is now with AS Monaco, Nenad Bjelica (FC Dnamo)and Igor Tudor ( FC Galatasaray), among others. Logarušic sent a voice note last Tuesday, saying he acquired his Uefa Pro badge in 2013 but couldn’t remember in which country he acquired it from. “I am an owner of (a) Uefa Pro licence. I started my coaching school around 2000. Finally after lots of experience and everything, I made my application in 2012, 2013 thereabout. I had all exams and passed to get my Pro licence. When I was in (trying to think of the country) I think I was in; am not sure which country I was in, I made an application just to get my licence because everything was ready for my Uefa Pro licence,” Logarušic said.