The Chronicle Judge Jarachara, Chronicle Reporter
GOVERNMENT has started paying education and medical bills for people living with disabilities, the fruits of a new policy that came into effect this year. Funds for that purpose have already been released and intended beneficiaries are required to register with the Department of Social Welfare. The Deputy Minister of Public Service, Labour and Social Welfare Cde Lovemore Matuke broke the news to people with disabilities during his tour of Jairos Jiri Training Centre and Sir Humphrey Gibbs Training Centre in Bulawayo yesterday. Cde Matuke said Government, through the new policy, has adopted all health and medical expenses for those with disabilities.
The money to cover that has already been availed and the ministry now awaits applications through the Department of Social Welfare. Deputy Minister Matuke said Government is determined to change the lives of people with disabilities. “I am delighted to tell you that Government has decided to meet your education and health expenses. “This means all your educational expenses from ECD to university level will be paid by the Government. Government has also realised that some of the medical requirements for disabled persons are expensive and as such are beyond the reach of individuals hence its decision to pay for these expenses. All people with disabilities are entitled to free medication at all Government hospitals,” said Deputy Minister Matuke. Government now has a department headed by a Director and a Deputy Director to deal with affairs of people with disabilities. Deputy Minister Matuke said the system for the payment of the education and medical bills has already been operationalised. He said any grievances regarding the operationalisation of the new system will be attended to promptly. “This policy replaced the 1992 policy. The new director of the disabled is mandated to deal with disability issues, teach the disabled how to cope with their condition, educate them on their rights and many other duties,” he said. Deputy Minister Matuke bemoaned attitudes exhibited by some in society and urged people to change their attitudes towards people with disabilities. He said disability does not mean inability and no one is immune to disability. “In Shona they say ‘seka urema wafa’ (no one is immune to disability) this clearly tells us that none of us is immune to disability, therefore, we must all collectively change our behaviour towards the way we care for the disabled. These people are able to work for themselves and all what they need is to be encouraged and afforded equal opportunities,” said Cde Matuke. He said it is the President’s wish through his Government that all citizens regardless of their condition have equal access to resources and opportunities including education and health. Sir Humphrey Gibbs Training Centre Mrs Spiwe Mwenda thanked the Deputy Minister for bringing the good news and the Government for coming up with such a progressive policy. She said medication bills had been a headache for them. “This has been long overdue intervention which is very welcome. People with disabilities need special medication which one cannot finance so we are thankful to the Government for this decision. The Bulawayo Provincial Development Co-ordinator Mr Paul Nyoni applauded Government for the initiative and urged Bulawayo residents to support the new policy to enhance the lives of those with disabilities. — @jdgjarachara