The Chronicle Hazel Marimbiza For most children with disabilities in Zimbabwe, going to school is an out-of-reach dream. For the relative few who are able to attend, the experience is often a hard one. A report by Progression Zimbabwe in collaboration with the National Association of Societies for the Care of the Handicapped (NASCOH), shows that 34 percent of girls with disabilities in Zimbabwe and 22 percent of boys with disabilities never attend school. The study also shows that children with hearing, visual and intellectual impairments are significantly more likely never to attend school compared to children with physical impairments. There are many reasons for their exclusion, including poverty, physical inaccessibility, discriminatory attitudes of school staff and lack of adequate training for teachers and school principals in inclusive education methods. After noting some of these challenges preventing children with disabilities from attending school the Government has stepped in and adopted some measures to improve access to education for children with disabilities by paying for their education. As part of its efforts to promote inclusive education and ensure that all children have the chance to succeed in life, the Deputy Minister of Public Service, Labour and Social Welfare Cde Lovemore Matuke recently said all educational expenses for children with disabilities from ECD to university level will be paid by the Government. This move by the Government also comes at a time when children with disabilities are being left behind by global efforts to improve education opportunities for all, as gaps between children with and without disabilities have increased dramatically in developing countries, according to a new research from the World Bank and the Global Partnership for Education. The study titled, ‘Disability Gaps in Educational Attainment and Literacy’ found that primary school completion for children with disabilities in 19 developing countries including Zimbabwe, is just 48 percent, and as many as three in 10 children with disabilities have never been in school. The study, based on an analysis of census data, also found that literacy rates and secondary school completion lag considerably behind. Only six in 10 children with disabilities can read and write and only a third complete secondary school. The gaps between children with and without disabilities have increased substantially over the last 30 to 40 years. Children with disabilities have largely been excluded from efforts to improve education outcomes in the developing world. For example, despite high primary school enrolment in many of the countries covered by the report, the gap in primary school completion between disabled and non-disabled children stands at 15 percent for girls and 18 percent for boys. These statistics predict a horrendous future for most disabled children hence Government efforts to provide free education for children with disabilities will go a long way in uplifting their lives. Disability rights activists said the recent move by the Government to start paying education for children living with disabilities has ushered in new hope among the disabled community. Ms Sibonisiwe Mazula, the coordinator of the Zimbabwe Down’s Syndrome Association (ZDSA) said Government efforts will grant equal opportunities to all children. “We are pleased Government will start paying school fees for disabled children as this will ensure that all children have the same opportunities to go to school,” said Ms Mazula. She added that when children with disabilities can realise their right to education, it will have a lifelong and positive impact on their learning, achievement and employment opportunities, contributing both to their own development as well as to the economic, social and human development of their communities and countries. A volunteer and youth representative at ZDSA, Mr Bonlat Machiha said getting children with disabilities in school will ensure that they become independent adults. “What is most painful is that most children living with disabilities who did not have the opportunity to attend school depend on others, thus becoming an economic drain on their communities simply because they were denied the opportunity to be educated and fend for themselves. Now that they will be able to go to school, when they get older they will not continue to be dependent on others,” said Mr Machiha. Students and teachers across Bulawayo also expressed gratitude for Governments initiative to pay school fees for children with disabilities. Vusa Moyo, a pupil from Pumula High School said he always wished for Government to include children with disabilities in schools so that their lives can be improved. “I am happy most of the children will now be able to attend school because it’s alarming to note the numerous number of disabled children who could be attending school like me but are deprived of the opportunity because of their disabilities,” said Vusa. He added: “Society’s attitude towards people with disabilities reflects a view that people with disabilities are useless liabilities who have no role to play in society so if the children get an education and excel in life they will be able to change the status quo,” he said. Mr Albert Maphosa, a teacher at Dandande Primary School in Lupane said this initiative by Government is important as it will see disabled children in rural areas also attaining education. “In most cases, disabled children in urban areas are privileged to go to school. We are grateful that Government has decided to help disabled children as this will also give a chance to disabled children in rural areas to also go to school,” he said. Governments’ efforts in ensuring children with disabilities get education are applaudable but still more needs to be done to ensure the children learn in a conducive environment. The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) call for inclusive and equitable quality education, with the aim of ensuring equal access to all levels of education for the vulnerable, including children with disabilities. The SDGs call for building and upgrading education facilities that are child, disability and gender sensitive and also provide safe, inclusive and effective learning environment. The Government has been urged to tackle other challenges which prevent children with disabilities from attaining holistic education. Mr Maphosa said ensuring adequate teacher training would greatly assist disabled children to excel. “The ability of teachers to provide quality education to students with disabilities depends on their training and qualifications. However, teachers often struggle due to already overcrowded classes. “Government should offer upstream pre-service training for future teachers and invest in in-service teacher training comprising of practical stages and a mentoring system because these approaches have proved to be effective,” said Mr Maphosa. He added: “However, it is important to train specialised teachers as it is not possible to train all mainstream teachers to be sufficiently fluent in Braille, sign language and augmentative and alternative communication modes.” Mr Machiha said the Government should formulate all policy-making, planning and monitoring activities in a way that ensures all children, regardless of disability, can benefit from inclusive quality education on an equal basis. “To fulfil this obligation, the Government should end discriminatory medical assessments and ensure reasonable accommodation and accessibility in schools. “There should be provision of adapted school facilities like ramps, toilets, special equipment and apparatus as well as making appropriate teaching and learning materials available. The education system, including teachers, the school environment, and education methods should be reformed to meet needs of diverse learners,” said Mr Machiha.