The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE Premier Soccer League (PSL) is looking for Covid-19 compliance officers that will ensure clubs conform to set protocols during training sessions. Clubs should hire Covid-19 compliance officers and must have submitted the names by Friday to facilitate their training. Individuals interested should submit their applications by Friday. “Applications are hereby invited from current and prospective individuals for Covid-19 compliance officers on a voluntary basis. Suitable candidates should be well versed with the WHO and Ministry of Health and Child Care Covid-19 health protocols. Candidates should have own vehicle and be ready to start immediately.” The compliance officers will liaise with health, security and football authorities to ensure the security and safety of all stakeholders before, during and after football training sessions and matches. They will also work closely with match commissioners to ensure smooth operations before, during and after football matches. Compliance officers will also work closely with the PSL Sports Medicine Committee to follow up on identified compliance concerns. Meanwhile, PSL chief executive officer Kennedy Ndebele warned clubs against engaging in unsanctioned friendly matches, adding that they risk being penalised. “There are conditions that clubs have to meet before playing friendly matches and those that decide to engage in such games without being cleared will be punished. We don’t want to compromise gains that have been made to ensure that football is played. “Clubs are aware of the health protocols that they have to follow to be granted permission to play friendly or training games. Another thing that has been stopping friendly matches is the pending appointment of Covid-19 compliance officers, which is a key requirement for all activities,” said Ndebele. He said upon engagement of Covid-19 compliance officers, a training programme will be carried out with “speed” to facilitate for them to start working. – “ZililoR