The Chronicle Lovemore Dube
A notable feature in the Highlanders FC history has always been the quality of its captains as players and leaders on and off the field. “I had a great time at Highlanders FC, I enjoyed my stay, my bond with the rest of my teammates was so good.” These are the words of one of the best defenders ever to don the Bosso strip Dazzy Kapenya. He had praise for the executives he worked under, one led by Roger Muhlwa and the other by the late James Mangwana-Tshuma. The Bosso board, he also said, was supportive in lifting the club flag high in the era 1998-2002 which bore four championships and a league cup double. Kapenya was quick to say the period also had its own problems which were solved amicably. “Not that we did not encounter any challenges, we did but solved them as a family. I also respected the multitudes of fans who supported us,” said Kapenya. The former Warriors defender who captained Highlanders FC for two seasons after the departure of Thulani “Biya” Ncube, is among four former Highlanders FC players to win the Soccer Star of the Year gong. He followed in the footsteps of Mercedes Sibanda, Peter Ndlovu and Zenzo Moyo. Before him were other defenders Ephert Lungu, James Takavada, Ephraim Chawanda and Sibanda (Mercedes). Great defenders like Sherperd Murape, Sunday Chidzambwa, Stephen Chuma, Charles Sibanda, Ephraim Moloi, Douglas Mloyi, Shadreck Ngwenya, Alexander Maseko, Amos Rendo and Daniel Chikanda had failed to land that one. Kapenya was identified by Bosso legend Madinda Ndlovu while playing for Southern Region Division One side, Corrugated in 1997. He would make his debut against Chapungu in a 3-3 draw at Ascot Stadium, Gweru in a central defence partnership which had a young Bekithemba Ndlovu and club veteran Makheyi Nyathi. “I played with Bekithemba Ndlovu and Makheyi Nyathi in the heart of the defence in a 3-5-2 formation. When I arrived at Highlanders, Biya was used in midfield but as we progressed, we went on to form one of the strongest defences in the league, Biya, Bekithemba and myself,” said Kapenya. He also spoke about Melody Wafawanaka who arrived with other soldiers from the Defence Forces, Britto Gwere, Eddie Nyika, Darlington Phiri and Eddie Nyika. “He was a great defender,” said Kapenya. He confessed to poor returns by the 1997 team which was under construction with Madinda and Rahman Gumbo at the helm. The arrival of Ernest Sibanda as manager in 1998 marked the resurgence of a sleeping giant as silverware were won one after the other with league titles too. Two weeks after recruiting Kapenya, Madinda told this writer that more would be said and written about the player who would go as far as the national team. Indeed appearing on the calendar and winning 59 caps with the Warriors were a fair return to a player who played at a time when Zimbabwe had great centrebacks like Kaitano Tembo, Vintu Fulawayo, Dumisani Mpofu, Asani Matore, Pearson Matare, Herbert Dick, David Mkandawire, Brian Njobvu, Sikhumbuzo Banda, Chamunoda Musanhu and Thulani Ncube. Kapenya earned his first cap in 2000. Of his stay at Bosso, he said it was a great feeling to be among the best and that those who help others to great heights must be appreciated.
Kapenya said growing up he played as a striker at school with his Njube High School mate Ronald Sibanda in midfield as his chief supplier of scoring opportunities. At Njube he played alongside Madanisa Phiri, Raymond Ncube and Sibanda with the other two teaming up with him at Corrugated. “Ronald, who was my captain at Njube, used to spoil me with passes,” said Kapenya. Growing up in Bulawayo, he said he was inspired by the exploits of Willard Khumalo, Mercedes Sibanda Benjamin Nkonjera, Rahman Gumbo and Adam Ndlovu who were members of the national team. “As a young boy back then, it was every young player’s dream to play for a great club like Highlanders and my dream was fulfilled when I made the move in 1997,” he said. The 41-year-old former star is part of a long list of great players who have captained the club who include Tymon Mabaleka, Edward Dzowa, Mercedes Sibanda, Willard Khumalo, Thulani Ncube, Douglas Mloyi, Tapuwa Kapini, Innocent Mapuranga, Gilbert Banda and Ariel Sibanda.