The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
SEGREGATION by the Rhodesian government made it difficult for blacks to get well-paying jobs in the tourism industry and to start their own companies. Hotels and tour operating companies were dominated by whites who also were the majority of travellers. Attainment of independence by the Zimbabwean nationalists in 1980 removed the bottlenecks in education and employment, ushering in a new crop of managers and workers. Before independence, the tourism sector was dominated by white workers, executives and operators but since 1990 the sector is mixed, with local blacks also starting their own businesses in the tourism industry with some owning hotels, lodges, restaurants, tour operating companies, shuttle and car hires, travel agencies and others. The Education for all Policy by Government led to opening of training schools such as School of Hospitality and Tourism at Bulawayo Polytechnic and other colleges countrywide where graduates are churned out into the sector. The colonial approach shut out black Zimbabweans from attaining education that could catapult them to managerial level or to start their own tourism businesses. Enactment of the indigenisation policy also saw many blacks emerging from oblivion to lead the industry. The country’s land reform which was implemented in 2000 also saw some blacks taking over some conservancies and conduct hunting and safari activities which were predominantly white led before Independence. Ecologist and wildlife farmer Mr Mark Russell who chairs the Gwayi Valley Conservation Area commended Government for supporting the industry. “Certainly black people’s participation in the Safari and hunting industry is growing fairly fast as Government has also deliberately supported initiatives for women in tourism. Tertiary education programmes in tourism have increased as learner uptake has grown too resulting in the increase of participation in the safari and hunting industry, “ said Mr Russell. He said indigenous players visibility has grown due to the easy accessibility into the industry. “Government departments have played a vital role in facilitating enabling environments like affordable operating licences and permits as well as education,” he said. Employers Association for the Tourism and Safari Operators Association president Mr Clement Mukwasi said the tourism business had evolved from being a minority business that it was before Independence. He said while it took a long time before black people could fit in the scope of things, independence introduced education and empowerment to a lot of black Zimbabweans. “At the moment the staffing across all the sub sectors of the tourism industry is black. Senior management and owners of the businesses are now a mixture of all people of skill across the colour bar,” he said. Young people have also made significant inroads into the sector. — @ncubeleon