The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
A PURGE in the Zimbabwe Referees Committee (ZRC) has resulted in four commissioners and two referees, including the experienced duo of Sabelo Sibindi and Edson Nkau, being “retired” ahead of the 2021 season. ZRC chairperson Bryton Malandule said his committee had supreme and independent permission to promote and demote any referee or match commissioner at any given time using a criteria “which I cannot divulge”. ZRC secretary general Obert Zhoya sent a message on the referees’ WhatsApp group on March 27 advising them of a refresher course set for Bulawayo at the end of this month, but unlike the norm, he said only “invited” referees will be sent more detail about the course “on your individual email”. “Afternoon all. With football resumption expected early May, be advised that the referees committee will run a refresher course and fitness test end of April in Bulawayo. Let us prepare adequately. Those invited and finer course details will be sent on individual emails next week,” read Zhoya’s message. Sources among the referees revealed that other commissioners “retired” include Mlindeli Ndebele and Svosverai Chokuda, while whistleblower Allen Basvi and upcoming female referee Blessing Mpande were not invited for the course. “It’s unfortunate that people are taking personal matters to this level. Vindictiveness is what led to this. Some of the people left out are accused of being behind the leaking of information on the sex scandal that rocked the referees committee last year,” said a source. However, Malandule justified the exclusion of some commissioners and referees from the list for the 2021 season, saying they need to work with a field of 80 referees and 30 match commissioners yet they have hundreds currently in their register. “We have hundreds of referees and commissioners (and) we need 80 referees and 30 match commissioners for this course. Those that come to the press when we have our own channnels of communication maybe it explains why they are not in this group. The Fifa and Elite Referees and Elite Commissioners panel is valid for one season. Hence every year we select Fifa referees. If one is in the panel it’s not in perpetuity, it’s up to the referees committee to promote or demote offcials using our criteria, which unfortunately l cannot share with the press,” said Malandule. However, with football having been in limbo since 2019 for most referees except those who officiated in the Castle Challenge Cup final between Highlanders and FC Platinum, the criteria that Malandule and company used should be of public interest since referees are graded according to their field performances.