The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter A CHEEKY fish poacher was shot once on the thigh after he allegedly attacked an anti-poaching team with a rowing stick while resisting arrest when he was caught fishing on Sengwa River in Siabuwa, Binga. Freddy Mudenda (34) of Sinamsanga village under Chief Sinamsanga in Siabuwa was rushed to Chunga Clinic after being shot on the thigh by Zimbabwe Parks and Wildlife Management Authority (ZimParks) ranger Mr Eddy Hwenhamo on Monday. According to police, Mr Hwenhamo opened fire in self-defence after Mudenda allegedly hit two scouts with a rowing stick as he resisted arrest. Mudenda who was treated under police guard, faces charges of fishing in a protected area and possessing prohibited fishing material but is yet to appear in court. Matabeleland North police spokesperson Inspector Glory Banda confirmed the incident. He said Mudenda’s condition is stable but urged members of the public to cooperate with law enforcement agents when a lawful operation is being carried out. “On 5 April at 7AM a ZimParks ranger Eddy Hwenhamo from Chete Safaris was in the company of three scouts Emmanuel Sibanda (42), Killin Mostern (37) Julius Mumoande (32) from International Anti-poaching Forum who are stationed at Vandalete base in Segwa,” said Insp Banda. He said the team was on a river patrol in a boat along Sengwa river when it spotted Mudenda removing twine nets from the water. The anti-poaching team reportedly approached Mudenda and advised him that he was under arrest for fishing in a prohibited area and also for possession of prohibited fishing nets. They instructed Mudenda to jump into their boat so they take him to their base but he refused and peddled his canoe to the river shore with the team in pursuit. Insp Banda said Mr Hwenhamo who was armed with a loaded AK 47 rifle jumped off the boat into the water to effect an arrest on Mudenda who resisted and held his rowing stick showing intention to attack. Two of the scouts also jumped off the boat to back up Mr Hwenhamo and Mudenda hit both of them with the stick. Sensing danger, Mr Hwenhamo fired at Mudenda and hit him on the thigh to subdue him after which he was arrested. Insp Banda said Mudenda was taken to Chunga clinic where his condition is stable while the two scouts suffered no serious injuries. “We appeal to citizens to be very law abiding and cooperate with public officials whenever a lawful arrest is being effected so that we don’t end in unfortunate circumstances,” said Insp Banda. -@ncubeleon 