The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent THE Bulawayo Music Association (BMA) will this morning, converge at M and M conference room (Haddon and Sly 2nd floor) where an executive committee will be appointed. The meeting is part of a raft of measures being put in place by the association to rekindle its image. BMA was formed over 10 years ago where it was spearheaded by Khuxxman. It disbanded and later made a comeback in 2019. An interim committee which had Khuxxman, Mjox, Urban Culture’s Kuda Takundwa, Clint, Sipho and Thuts Harsh Touch was formed. Thuts who has been leading from the front of late said the appointment of an executive board will help them realise the association’s goals. “Of late, we’ve been operating with fringe manpower comprising of me, Clint and Sipho. Now, it’s our wish to let the musicians select their preferred leaders. Musicians are also allowed to nominate themselves for the various posts in the executive committee. “The posts include chairperson, vice-chairperson, secretary, vice secretary, treasurer, public relations officer and five committee members,” said Thuts who is the acting chairperson. “At this meeting, we regard every musician or musical practitioner in Bulawayo as a quality candidate or member and we call on, especially female musicians, to take part in this. The committee that will be appointed will be tasked to set this year’s goals that will improve the Bulawayo music industry outlook, create synergies with various stakeholders and look at the welfare of its members.” BMA is a registered association with the National Arts Council of Zimbabwe and its successes include the landmark venture of partnering with National Arts Gallery of Bulawayo to form a Mculo Corner which is the central music selling point for all musicians under the association. The association also formed an online music platform, Rev Review show which was meant to help recording artistes improve their performance skills on live online sets. – @mthabisi_mthire  