The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Gwanda Correspondent
WHEN the country’s worst drought of 1992 left his father’s pockets dry, Nhlanhla Gabula was left out of school just as he finished his Form One Third Term at Gwanda High School. With a rural background from Nswazi in Tshabambeba village in Ward 6 under Chief Sinqobile Mabhena in Umzingwane district, his 14-year-old mind was puzzled as to his “next” life. To many even now, he is just a zealous engine mechanic but the always vibrant, straightforward and level focused Oriyantso is yet to achieve his ultimate goal of assembling from scratch his own type of A-level quad bike. The one currently parked at his Bike World Engineering and Motor Spares compound was developed from scratch last year in November using scrap material and at present it idles and makes appearance in the dusty streets of Gwanda. For Oriyantso as his is popularly known in the mining town of Gwanda, all he wanted was to give his family the earnest living when he dropped out of school. As per the norm in the rich gold provincial capital where a number of school drop outs find solace in mining, Oriyantso was to in 1996 find his way metres underground at Tshebetshebe Mining Site in Collen Bawn. Being in touch with money as a teen the whole year, Oriyantso tried finding his foot and later landed to the busy streets of the country’s capital, Harare, where a whole new life was evolved. This time in agriculture. As an ostrich keeper, Oriyantso practiced his trade at a time the ostrich industry had around 200 farmers who reared the bird commercially countrywide, but now just a few are left in private wildlife parks. Looking after the needs of the bird with strong legs that allow them to run up to 70 kilometres per hour when necessary, with strides of up to eight metres, this was an ultimate 21st life experience for Oriyantso who as the 2000’s approached was to hear his roots bells ringing, calling him back home. At the turn of the millennium, he became his father Amos Gabula’s right hand man where they welded in the family’s home at Gwanda’s oldest township Jahunda. Around 2004 and 2005, he made under the eyes of his father his first quad bike with scrap metal and finances constrained his dream that shuttered everything leading him to destroy the “to be” quad bike. Fast forward to 2017, he decided to start his own small scale engineering company and found a place at the Jahunda light industrial sites between MC bulding turnoff and Renkini. His creative mind is just like of his father who in the late 80’s astonished his fellow villagers at Jikihola line at Tshabambeba village through a home made and designed cannon boat that they sailed using as a family at the local Masiza Dam. Now standing on his feet, Oriyantso used to travel from work to and fro the deadest end of the town at the South-Eastern mountains at Ultra High suburb. However, he had to leave his family behind and stay at the compound as thieves have inflicted wounds to his passion by breaking in and stealing tools and equipment. This is where the home made quad bike formation again once began. “Having made a quad bike before which never came to see the day I decided when l started to stay on the premises to deal at once and for all with the wound and put my skills to test. “I managed to raise money to fulfill my dream and this is where l raised all the parts required. In three and a half months l was done and dusted,” he said. “This is not the ideal quad bike l desire to design. With all the right equipment l can pull it off in a month without any scracth or untight screw. “My target is when l get all this to create employ and grow as a company that is able to make two quad bikes a month or even more considering the raw equipment,” said Oriyantso. The rough sketch surely is top notch as local farmers have been on Oriyantso’s tail bidding for up to five cows to get the all terrain bike. “I will never sell this sample even in my trying times and l want to wake up and see it daily to inspire me to hustle and be able to grow my company and even get it to be formally registered.” A local farmers from White spring area Mr Johanne Siziba said such talent should not be put to waste as such machinery is of vital importance in agriculture fulfilling it’s full viability. “I would love to trade the quad bike even for four cows because it would be of great help to me running my daily errands.
“I can be able to track all my livestock in time and also look out for my fields. Such great minds should be incorporated into the professional motor mechanic industry,” said Mr Siziba. @mthabisi_mthire