The Chronicle  Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
GOSPEL queen Mai Mwamuka is promoting her past works as she wants them to be easily accessible in order for her audience to tap more into her amazing works. This comes at a time when some of her recent songs are topping radio charts with Totenda Jesu having emerged second on Star FM’s gospel chart show this past weekend. On Power FM, it was on position seven. Mai Mwamuka said she is working on getting more followers and is doing this by availing the tracks for free on WhatsApp. She said her music can also be found on major online stores and on the local Buddie Beats. “We’re working flat out to get the recently released album, Jesu to the people as recording a song and not getting it to the people is a job undone. Our first award-winning album, Highly Lifted UP remains untapped and since we believe the songs are timeless, we’re now on a mission to promote them.” She said she is overwhelmed with the support she is getting as people seek to get closer to God through her music. “The music is being received well by fans, churches and worshippers. All glory be to God as some of my songs are competing in gospel chart shows on various radio stations. This shows that people are being revived and blessed by the music. And it’s not only those locally-based but across the globe. I pray many more get access to it,” Mai Mwamuka said. “Currently, we’re working towards the release of a few singles and some collaborations which will culminate in the release of our third album next year.” The Pane Nyasha hit-maker said her following has been growing steadily, something which has been encouraging. She added that she has pending shows in Cape Town, Johannesburg, UAE, Zambia as well as Highly Lifted UP local worship galas which she hopes to stage as soon as the Covid-19 pandemic has been contained. While she waits to resume shows, she is conducting mentorship programmes online with a focus on marriage. “Due to Covid-19 lockdowns, many relationships have been under stress and pressure. I’ve been conducting a WhatsApp programme and one on one counselling for couples, something that has saved a lot of marriages. “Many marriages are suffering because of ignorance by both partners hence mentorship, whether pre or post-marital is key,” said the musician-cum-marriage counsellor. -@mthabisi_mthire.