The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
KWAITO sensation, MziStozz Mfanafuthi who was signed under Cal Vin’s Kontrol Tribe record label has resumed work on his debut album which he had put on hold following the death of the producer last year. Born Mzingaye Ray Ncube, the talented youngster was working closely with Cal Vin and had hoped to drop his debut album titled iK.I.N.D last year. Following the death of That Luveve Boy, as Cal Vin was affectionately known, MziStozz Mfanafuthi had to suspend the plans.
He said he has now resumed work and is looking at releasing the audio and visuals for one of the tracks, Nomakanjani soon and this will be followed by his 13-track album two weeks later. Chronicle Showbiz caught up with the kwaito sensation who is an electrical engineer at the Bulawayo City Council and he shared his plans to release the album in memory of the late producer. “Before Cal Vin died, I was working on an album under his record label Kontrol Tribe since I was signed there. Cal Vin’s death therefore, affected the recording plans but I’m glad that I’ve resumed recording and I’m now concluding the album at Tarryn Talana Studios.“I hope I’ll be done by May,” said MziStozz Mfanafuthi. He said a single, Nomakanjani, will be dropped on May 1 as a teaser of the album and will be his first project since Cal Vin’s death.
MziStozz Mfanafuthi seems determined to penetrate the local music scene as his forthcoming album features heavyweights in the form of Tebza, Mawiza, Cal Vin the late, Asaph, Kid Thrill, CMK and Bekezela. The album is being produced by Skido Flex with some tracks having been produced by Cal Vin. MziStozz Mfanafuthi said his love for music started when he was in Grade Three after his grandmother bought him a guitar.
He said his father who is a taxi driver inspired him to be a kwaito musician. “I’m the second born son in my family hence the name uMfanafuthi. I grew up in Entumbane suburb before moving to Cowdray Park where I’m based now. “I’ve been doing music for as long as I remember but I only started doing it professionally after completing school. The vision is to keep the kwaito genre alive locally,” he said. — @mthabisi_mthire.