The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Madlela Skhobokhobo (real name Mothusi Bashimane Ndlovu)’s firstborn son, Boithamelo Mligane Ndlovu aka Basotho is slowly following in his father’s footsteps as he has taken an interest in the arts and enrolled at the College of Creative Arts (CCA). History has proven that children of musicians often tend to want to follow their parents’ careers — Andy Brown and Ammara Brown, Oliver Mtukudzi and Selmor Mtukudzi, Jah Prayzah and Mukudzeyi Jnr, Ndux Malax and Ndux Jnr and Tongai Moyo and Peter Moyo. Chronicle caught up with Basotho who said he has decided to take up art as a profession, something he did not grow up envisaging. “Honestly speaking, as I was growing up, I didn’t think I had the voice for music and acting. All I wanted was to play soccer nationally and internationally. “Funny enough, I discovered that I had the talent in me after I started to write dramas during my stint at Cyrene High where I penned a number of plays,” said the 17-year-old Basotho who is turning 18 next month. Just like his father, Basotho seems to be passionate about acting and music. “The vision is clear. I want to release my debut song soon. I also featured on Madlela Skhobokhobo’s song which I hope will serve as a breakthrough for me. “The vision is to bring something unique and fresh with the hope of being a powerhouse someday. I feel like as Zimbabweans, we aren’t proud of our own things thus I want to bring authenticity and get people to appreciate our cultures through my music.” Added Basotho: “What drove me into professional music is the zeal I have to be great. I have that fire within me that is driving me to claim my spot in the arts field.” His enrolment at CCA, Basotho said is to equip him in preparation for the world of film as he wants to be able to produce his own films since he is studying Film and TV production. Commenting on his child taking up arts as a career, Madlela Skhobokhobo said he was supportive of his decision. He said Basotho is a force to reckon with as he is actually better than him musically. “It’s his choice and I think on the music side, he’s very talented, more than me. He’s also a very good composer. On the acting side, I haven’t seen much from him, but he told me he’s started a drama group at school and is actually writing their dramas which is good.” – @mthabisi_mthire