The Chronicle Boitumelo Makhurane, Chronicle Reporter
NATIONAL Blood Service Zimbabwe (NBSZ) has been receiving significant blood donations since the beginning of the new school calendar in March. The Covid-19 induced lockdown measures had a negative bearing on blood collections as it interrupted the steady flow of blood donations from high yielding panels, especially schools and tertiary institutions that contribute more than 70 percent of blood to the national blood bank. NBSZ communications officer Mr Ephraim Mubayi said: ‘‘Since the opening of schools there has been significant improvement on blood stocks nationally. This is mainly attributed to the support we have received from both ministries of Primary and Secondary Education and Higher and Tertiary Education who have so far granted us the letters of approval for NBSZ to access their facilities.” Mr Mubayi said in four of their five branches they have about five-days stock cover, which is the expected adequate stocks level. ‘‘Harare has less than two days cover and will be getting support stocks from branches,’’ said Mr Mubayi. Before the Covid-19 pandemic NBSZ usually had adequate stocks of up to seven days stock, although in rare instances they would experience high demand for certain blood groups for instance blood group O because it is universally compatible to all types. Apart from donors from schools, blood donors are encouraged to donate blood at both static and mobile clinics. ‘‘We continue to encourage blood donors to donate blood at both our static and mobile clinics. Youth galas have been lined up across the country in April to boost blood supplies,’’ said Mr Mubayi. NBSZ has cultivated a reliable population of blood donating youths known as the ‘‘Pledge 25’’. The programme that was conceived by NBSZ and has been adopted by more than 80 countries worldwide. The pledge 25 is a grouping of youths who pledge to contribute 25 pints of blood post high school until the age of 30. In February this year, NBSZ appealed for blood donors of all blood groups to donate blood as Covid-19 lockdown affected the donation of blood from members of the public and thus their blood stock drastically dropped. — @Boity104