The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau CROSS border traders from across country have appealed to the Government to allow them access through the land borders and to also intervene in the challenges most of them are having in accessing the Covid-19 clearance certificates. Currently the country’s borders are open only to commercial cargo/freight, diplomats on Government business, returnees and bodies for burial in the country. The cross borders traders, most of them falling under the informal sector, say they have been hard hit by the Covid-19 pandemic since the start of the lockdowns to contain its spread in March last year. Those that pass-through borders are being subjected to a number of health screening processes. Speaking on the sidelines of an ongoing training and capacity building program that is being rolled out by the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) in Beitbridge, the traders’ representatives said they are willing to do their business under prescribed conditions. “Since the start of the lockdowns in March last year, most of our members who restock and sale goods outside our borders are failing to operate under normal conditions,” said the project coordinator for Zimbabwe Cross-Border Traders Association, Mr Eric Chikukwa. “We have tried to pool resources to import our goods as consolidated cargo but that is not sustainable considering the costs and that some need to sale their products out of the country”. Mr Chikukwa said they were also having challenges in getting the Covid-19 clearance certificates whose production price averaging US$60 was beyond the reach of their ordinary members. He said it will be prudent for the Government to ensure the testing and issuance of these certificates is done at Government and Council clinics at relatively affordable prices. The official said private players have not been kind to them in terms of pricing. “One of the principal challenges is the issues of Covid-19 certificates that cross border traders should have to access the borders. These certificates are expensive to get considering that we don’t have the resources get these at higher process. “This scenario is exposing our members to the risk of getting infected since some end up using undesignated crossing points along the border to export or import their stock. Illegal crossing points are a high risk for Covid19,” said Mr Chikukwa. He said the fact that there was no harmonization of operations between South African and Zimbabwe border authorities had also presented more challenges to travellers. Currently, South African borders are open for ordinary travellers while Zimbabwe remain closed. This set up Mr Chikukwa said was fueling a lot of border jumping and smuggling. Beitbridge Chairman of the cross-border transport operator, Mr Takavingei Mahachi said, “We are counting losses. Our vehicles are parked and we continue paying for permits as commercial transporters, but we are out of business. “We are appeal to the government to open up space for small time cross border transporters. We play a great role in facilitating trade in our own way”. He said they were also concerned on the way in which some laws were drafted and giving people limited time to prepare for their full implementation. Mr Mahachi said before the pandemic most of them would get at least R800 daily but now most of them were out of business. 