The Chronicle Judith Phiri, Business Reporter
THE Zimbabwe Republic Police has pledged to work closely with the National Railways of Zimbabwe (NRZ) to combat vandalism of railway infrastructure and related crimes that frustrate smooth business. The officer commanding police in Bulawayo, Commissioner Patton Mbangwa said they will intensify efforts to curb vandalism, which affects strategic operations by NRZ and frustrate service delivery to the public. He was speaking at an event to receive 1 000 litres of fuel donated to the police by the NRZ at the company’s Central Mechanical Workshop in Westgate on Tuesday. “Our mandate as ZRP is to ensure that there is peace and tranquillity. The things you have shown us here about NRZ property being vandalised through crime is worrying. “The assistant commissioner responsible for crime is going to talk about it to those who are on the ground to say this is the worry coming from NRZ,” said Commissioner Mbangwa. He said the ZRP will do all in its power to guarantee security at business premises and residential areas. Ass Comm Mbangwa paid tribute to NRZ saying the fuel donation would go a long way in enhancing mobility within the police force and urged other corporates to also budget for corporate social responsibility spending. NRZ public relations manager, Mr Nyasha Maravanyika, said the donation was part of their corporate social responsibility. “We are pleased to assist the police with the request they made to us as part of our CSR investment programme. Without the ZRP and our security services team, there is no way we can operate,” he said. Mr Maravanyika said NRZ would like to work closely with the ZRP in fighting crime especially vandalism of rail infrastructure.
He expressed concern over the rise in the number of people committing suicide on railway lines. “We would like to advise members of the public that the trains are still moving all over Zimbabwe and they should be careful on the railway tracks to preserve life. Drivers should also be on the lookout for trains when they cross rail-level crossings,” he said. Mr Maravanyika said NRZ was working on replacing copper cables with aluminum to minimise thefts and vandalisms of ail infrastructure. Bulawayo provincial police spokesperson Inspector Abednico Ncube also appealed to members of the public to safeguard railway property. He said the police were also carrying out campaigns encouraging people to seek counselling to avoid committing suicide.