The Chronicle Harare Bureau
THE Premier Soccer League family converge in Harare today, for their annual indaba, expected to complete the formalities of how domestic football will return. The league have proposed action gets underway on May 15, with the first matches of a knockout tournament, which will be staged over eight weeks. PSL chief executive, Kennedy Ndebele, told the weekly Game Plan football magazine show on ZTV, on Wednesday, the success of this tourney will guide them on when to restart the league championship. The league have also been talking to some partners ahead of the restart of the top-flight football programme. Today’s indaba, in the capital, will be attended by the 18 club chairpersons of the PSL clubs. Yesterday, PSL chairman, Farai Jere, provided more clarity ahead of today’s meeting. “We are about to start our season, with a tournament,’’ he said. “The league championship will start at around the quarter-finals of the tournament, provided the Government would have approved resumption of Divisions One and Two leagues. “That will resolve the promotion and relegation equation.’’ Earlier this week, Dynamos chairman, Isaiah Mupfurutsa, told our Harare Bureau they were looking to put across their concerns, during the indaba. “Obviously, as stakeholders, we have our own concerns that we will present to this meeting,’’ he said. ‘We also have expectations but I wouldn’t want to comment much on it because it will be more like pre-emptying. “Remember, we are also part of the decision-makers so, I feel, it may not be proper to share our thoughts now. “But, whatever comes out of the meeting will be binding, we will work with that because it’s a resolution made by all clubs.’’
Of late, there have been fights between players and clubs, over disagreements emanating from the interpretation of the Fifa guidelines, on contracts which expired last year. Some of the players never played for the clubs, because of the Covid-19 challenges, and they have faced challenges, as they try to move on.
Fifa and Zifa have encouraged negotiations but the guidelines make it difficult for the two parties to strike an agreement.