The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
MR DANISA Mkwananzi, an IsiNdebele teacher at Mosi-oa-Tunya High School in Victoria Falls has written a collection of short stories and the book has since been selected to be an Advanced Level IsiNdebele set book from this year to 2024. The book, Impilo Injalo has nine short stories pursing a theme of life’s ups and downs. First published in 2014, the book Impilo Injalo will be examined between next year and 2024, with this year’s Form Five IsiNdebele class already doing it as a set book. This could be the first work published in Victoria Falls and Hwange District being used in formal education. The short stories in the book are Ngingazi Kanjani, Abalindi, Ngikhumbula Ekhaya, Intandane Enhle, Abafundisi, Esikolo, Izipoko, Oyitshayileyo and Inzima Lindlela and those who have read the book have so far commended it for its richness in IsiNdebele language. While in most cases, people especially learners read books written by people they may not have met in life because most writers are retired scholars and some are now late, for locals this could be a source of motivation knowing they are reading a book from someone they know. Mr Mkwananzi was born in 1981 in Nkayi where he did his primary education at Lutsha and Katasa primary schools before going to Mpumelelo Secondary School. He then moved to Luveve High School in Bulawayo for A Level before enrolling at Hillside Teachers’ College to train as an IsiNdebele and Physical Education teacher. He started teaching at Mosi-oa-Tunya in 2003 and the school registered 100 percent pass rate for A Level IsiNdebele in 2019 when about 44 candidates had As in O Level. Besides helping learners in their studies, the book seeks to enrich IsiNdebele speakers especially at a time when there have been concerns about distortions and misprints of the language which some children have adopted as normal. Mr Mkwananzi said he was inspired by his late father who was a preacher and is also grateful for the support he received from his family, especially his wife Mayibongwinkosi. “I got inspired by my late father Mr Samson Nduna Mkwananzi who was a preacher. Each time he preached he would refer to his book Ngingazi Kanjani, a book we never saw. I told myself I had to honour him even if we didn’t see his book and I started writing in 2010. It is a dedication to my father and that’s why my first short story is titled Ngingazi kanjani,” said Mr Mkwananzi. He suspects that his father’s book was never published. The Zimbabwe School Examinations Council (Zimsec) officially communicated that the book was a set book in a circular this year. Mr Mkwananzi is grateful to the late Mr Bernard Dingani Ndlovu of IBhidi Publishing House for proof reading and editing the book although he died before it was published. He then took the manuscript to Zimbabwe Publishing House after seeing an advert and it was further edited by Ms Monica Nkomo. “When I finished my manuscript, I gave it to the late Ndlovu and I owe a lot to him because I learnt that we generalise IsiNdebele yet it’s wide and there are some words that make it rich. I wanted to give it the title Ngazi Kanjani but i realised that in life there are things that happen on their own whether they are good or bad and we have to accept them no matter how we want them to be different. “This inspired the title. As a teacher to have my work selected among those that are there to enrich our language is uplifting and encouraging. It also motivates learners because they can relate to the setting. This will also improve appreciation of literature as well as help put Mosi-oa-Tunya High School in the national picture since we are all identified by our organisations and work stations,” said Mr Mkwananzi. He said the idea is to enrich IsiNdebele than just teaching it in class. Mr Mkwananzi said it is up to educators and others to help protect their languages through promotion of a culture of reading. He said he will write more books to protect the Ndebele heritage. “If we don’t stand up some people will impose themselves on our language. We can’t be the generation that presides over the demise of our language hence we should make sure our children have proper IsiNdebele at their disposal. We didn’t learn IsiNdebele but we live it because language is about culture and way of life hence as writers, we need to have dignity in our work so that it is recognised. We should try to enrich it and correct mistakes done on it,” he said. He said he is grateful to his wife who stood by him despite spending time at work and writing the book and she was excited when the book was published and subsequently made a set book. Mr Mkwananzi said while he looks forward to financial benefits from royalties from the sale of the book, his biggest benefit is satisfaction from the fact that people will shape their lives from it. He is also grateful to Mosi-oa-Tunya High School head Mr Roland Sibanda, also a fundi in IsiNdebele, for supporting and encouraging him to soldier on.
Mr Sibanda encouraged teachers to use their talents to enhance learning in schools. “This is exciting to have one of our own writing a book that is being used countrywide and that from a rainbow town with many different languages we have someone promoting ours. This is a huge development especially for learners because they will read about places they know. The language used there is very simple but rich. We thank Zimsec for giving us such an opportunity as Victoria Falls and Hwange,” he said.-@ncubeleon