The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
BULAWAYO Chiefs FC have snapped up Highlanders’ junior product, central midfielder Dominic Jaricha as they continue beefing up their squad ahead of the restart of topflight action. The 24-year-old midfielder, who was released by Highlanders to CIWU on loan in 2019, has charmed Chiefs coach Thulani Sibanda, who has a knack for believing in underrated and discarded talent. Jaricha is one of three new faces at Chiefs, following the arrival of striker Fredrick Muza from TelOne and 19-year-old left-back Panashe Shoko from Victoria Falls’ Southern Region Division One outfit Mosi Rovers. From the squad that Chiefs assembled last year before Covid-19 interrupted sporting activities, they only lost utility player Shadreck Nyahwa to Dynamos. Sibanda is happy with his players’ progress, heading into the fourth week of training as they were among the first clubs to do Covid-19 tests. “We’re taking things easy. The stage that we are at is that of integrating physical conditioning with tactical work. We’ve been blessed in the sense that we retained almost all players we had before lockdown and the majority understand our demands. By the time we start the mini-league competitions, I’m confident that we will be ready,” said Sibanda. Premier Soccer League (PSL) action resumes on May 15, with a mini-league tournament in which teams have been placed in four groups and will play on a round-robin basis on a home and away basis. The top two teams in each group will proceed to the quarter-finals. At the beginning of 2020, Chiefs brought in 10 new faces, with Sibanda reinforcing his side in a bid to avoid relegation like they did in the 2018 and 2019 seasons. Former Soccer Star of the Year Charles Sibanda was one of their additions alongside former Ngezi Platinum Stars striker Billy Veremu on a season’s loan, midfielder Corey-Eli Black and defender Ben Nyahunzwi from Zim Leopards, midfielder Joe Nyabinde from Chicken Inn, Ghanaian winger Samuel Adom Antwi, goalkeeper Alfred Chiname from Masvingo United and left-back Gift Gumbo from CIWU.
They also signed the former FC Platinum pair of Hagiyazo Magaya and Keith Madera. Chiefs have also managed to tie down goalkeeper David Bizabani, defender Marlvin Mkolo, central attacking midfielder Arthur Musiiwa and striker Farau Matare, who were unsettled at the beginning of 2020 and tried to force their way out of the club. — @ZililoR