The Chronicle ARSENAL loanee Joe Willock came off the bench to score a dramatic equaliser and deny Tottenham a place in the top four. Harry Kane’s quickfire brace after Joelinton’s opener looked to have moved Jose Mourinho’s side up three places into the Champions League spots. But Willock, who had only been on seven minutes, had other ideas as he fired off the underside of the bar to bag a precious point for the relegation-threatened Magpies. Joelinton opened the scoring after 28 minutes with just his fourth league goal since arriving for £40 million two summers ago. But Spurs were ahead just six minutes later thanks to Kane’s double, which takes his tally to 19 for the season. The numbers are just ridiculous — in all competitions the Spurs skipper has been involved in 49 goals this season (29 goals and 16 assists). The first, 26 seconds after Joelinton’s strike, was as easy as they come, capitalising on Emil Krafth’s shocking attempted clearance to poke into an empty net. But the second was a thing of beauty, latching onto Tanguy Ndombele’s neat pass before rifling low across Martin Dubravka into the bottom corner. Kane then missed a golden chance to claim a hat-trick and seal the points — and he was made to pay when Willock smashed home from close range at the death. Bruce made five changes after their mauling at Brighton last time out, with Matt Ritchie handed his first start since calling his manager a “coward” in a training ground bust-up last month. Mourinho named the same side that beat Aston Villa last time out, with Son Heung-Min a sub following a hamstring injury. And it was a belting first-half, benefiting from the sort of shambolic defending no doubt seen across the land over the weekend now amateur football is back. Newcastle really should have been ahead via Dwight Gayle but Hugo Lloris was on hand to thwart him twice. The diminutive striker got in between Davinson Sanchez and Joe Rodon to nod on Jonjo Shelvey’s dinked ball, but Hugo Lloris leapt spectacularly to his right to claw away. Gayle gathered the rebound but the shot from point-blank range was weak and allowed the Frenchman to just about keep it out. Newcastle were emboldened though and had their lead 28 minutes in thanks to Joelinton — yes, that Joelinton!
But Mourinhio would have been seething at Spurs’ attempts to play out from the back. — The Sun