The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
While Rhumba music has mainly been concentrated in Plumtree, Tsholotsho and Kezi in Matabeleland South, a new kid on the block, Sifundo Nkala from Nkayi in Matabeleland North wants to register the district as a stronghold of the genre. Having worked with the likes of Ndux Junior, United Boys Band, Matopo Big Stars Band and Themba Boyoyo Mathe, Nkala says he believes he has garnered enough experience to launch a solo career. Fronting Mazwi Amahle Super Sounds Band, Nkala released his debut album, Johan 14, this year which he is promoting in Bulawayo using unorthodox, playing his music off a speaker on a pushcart he takes around. The six-track album which has hard-hitting tracks – Ukuswela Kwami, Bazali Bami, Uthando, Johan 14, Corona and Isiphiwo Sami was recorded at Real Studios in Nguboyenja suburb, Bulawayo. Judging by the number of people who are thronging the pushcart whenever they see the band in action, the musician may soon achieve his dream of registering Nkayi on the rhumba map as people are tipping the band and buying CDs. “I believe I’m on the right track as people love my music. I haven’t taken the album to any radio station, but I’ve already managed to sell more than 500 copies of the album using this method. I’ve met some people who’ve hired me to perform at their functions which has been a great boost. Once I take it (CD) to radio stations, I believe more doors will open for me,” said Nkala. Through his works, Nkala said he also wants to uplift Nkayi in terms of music development. “We have a number of musicians who hail from Nkayi, but the challenge is that most of them are not based in Zimbabwe. This has left a void in terms of music development as our area is still behind. So I want to try and change that as our people are starved of music shows,” he said. A builder by profession, Nkala said he has been using funds generated from that trade to support his music career. Born in 1988, he said from a young age, he was untouchable on the dance floor, leading to the discovery that music was his calling. The musician hails from Singeni line at Gwamba village, the same area where maskandi musician, Clopas Sikhosana hails from, although Nkala said they stay very far from each other. – @themkhust.