The Chronicle Own Correspondent
The world might soon learn from television screens, the little-known system of Western Celebration of African poverty; driven by the animal rights groups’ anti-wildlife use and anti-wild trade agenda. The Western animal rights groups’ anti-wild trade agenda not only harms African wildlife but also harms African people, who can never develop socio-economically without sustainable wild trade. Sadly, the Western forces that harm African people and wildlife by blocking international wild trade, continue to hypocritically and ironically claim that they love African people and their wildlife. How does one love that which they harm? Nevertheless, Western animal rights groups have successfully fooled the world that they love African wildlife but are ironically harming it by blocking wild trade. This in turn disincentivises wildlife and habitat conservation. Africans are unlikely to be able to conserve wildlife if it doesn’t benefit them. Therefore, the anti-wild trade Western animal rights groups and countries that accept to be influenced by them are collectively responsible for hurting African wildlife and people. This is the biggest scandal that video production houses in South Africa and the United States of America now want to expose, basing the story on a book written by one of Africa’s top environmental journalists, Johannesburg-based Emmanuel Koro. Entitled, Western Celebration of African Poverty — Animal Rights Versus Human Rights — the book has captured the imagination of the movie-making world. Requests to produce the movie based on it started as soon as the book was published in January 2020. A Johannesburg-based film production house was the first to make the request, followed by other local and international film production houses weeks and months later. The movie could be greeted with both anger and joy by Africans and Westerners. Anger for Africans, who might wonder “why is such a scandal on Western dictatorship on Africa’s wild trade only being told now, yet it has been taking place for almost half a century.” Also, anger for progressive Westerners who feel that they have been funding the animal rights movement that is hurting both African wildlife and people, by needlessly blocking international wild trade that is scientifically justified in elephant overpopulated and wildlife-rich Southern African countries. The movie could also bring a collective sense of joy by both progressive Westerners and Africans because when the truth about animal rights groups and western countries’ harmful anti-wild trade dictatorship over vulnerable African countries gets revealed, the culprits will become exposed and the progressive people in the world would demand an end to such a scandal. For the past 46 years, Western animal rights groups and governments have scandalously captured and converted the UN international trade regulating agency, CITES to an anti-trade body. Yet, CITES was originally established to regulate and not block international trade in endangered species of wild fauna and flora species, when it was formed in Washington DC in May 1975. Formed with a racist agenda at a time many African countries were becoming politically independent and could not be trusted to look after their wildlife in the mid-1970s, CITES has 45 years later confirmed its political and racist complexion. It has all the signs of the neo-colonial thinking that was harboured in the departed minds of the likes of fathers of Western colonialism who include Bismarck and King Leopold of Belgium. It has the patterns of economic exploitation similar to that of Partition of Africa at the Berlin Conference, where Africa was partitioned to benefit European countries, in 1884-85. “Africa is not and will never be free as long as it continues to allow the Western anti-wild international wildlife trade dictatorship over it,” said Koro. The world should be told through the forthcoming movie on Western Celebration on African Poverty — Animal Rights Versus Human Rights that the anti-wild trade Western countries and animal rights groups are the worst dictators on earth who stop people from legally and sustainably trading in their own abundant wild resources. “They hypocritically preach sustainable development and poverty alleviation as well as the achievement of the UN sustainable development goals (SDGs) by 2030 (less than 9 years away), yet they are increasingly block African countries from wild trade. “This is a violation of African people’ human and sovereign rights to benefit from wild trade. Trade bans have never saved a single elephant and rhino. “The ivory and rhino horn trade has been in force for the past 46 years but elephant and rhino poaching as well as illegal trade in ivory and rhino horn, continue to increase. “How can Africa successfully overcome poverty when international wild trade restrictions continue to be dictatorially imposed on it by Western forces? “There is no country on earth that can meaningfully develop without trading in its abundant resources. Therefore, Africa will never achieve meaningful development, SDGs and reduce poverty and inequality; as long as the Western animal rights groups and Western countries continue with their anti-wild trade dictatorship agenda on the continent.” 