The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Gwanda-based hip-hop artiste, Sbhevara (real name Thamsanqa Bazil Ndhlukula) says his R2 record label is open to all young artistes in the mining town that want to record their works. Sbhevara, who was born in Bulawayo before relocating to Matabeleland South, is passionate about the province’s arts scene and wants it to grow. In his quest to promote arts in the province, he urged up-and-coming artistes to take advantage of his record label which was established five years ago with the hope to sign and promote young artistes. Inspired by the likes of Eminem, Lil Wayne and the late Prokid, Sbhevara said: “In 2016, I set up the R2 record label which is based in Senondo, Gwanda. We have five artistes we are working with and these are LSN, JStyles, 90’s2k, DJ Stambo and Celixo. “The record label is open to everyone but our focus is on youngsters as I want to give them an opportunity to make a breakthrough in their careers,” said Sbhevara. Turning to his career, Sbhevara who is an aspiring producer, gamer, and graphic designer, said he penned his first song when he was in Grade Seven. “I made a breakthrough in music when I was doing my Grade Seven through my song Dollar Dollar. The song was well received. When I went to high school, I realised boarding wasn’t as exciting so I decided to entertain myself by joining T Dube and Friends choir. Through this group, I started singing even at church and grew musically as I could also do rhymes, verses and all sorts of things to do with music,” said Sbhevara. He said he was later to master the Fruit loops recording that ignited the spark leading him to be a music producer. “The first song that I recorded was S’thandimali. This was my turning point and since then, I’ve never looked back.” Sbhevara said he has a mixtape which is a collection of six tracks that are trending locally and regionally on Sound Cloud and YouTube. He says he has worked with DJ Drummz, TenRicks, Chronic 3vs18, Skolah, Duce, El Dope and EAG. — @mthabisi_mthire.