The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
Local music promoter, 3D Events, claims that they have lost nearly R100 000 in bookings they made last year for South Africa’s Black Motion and Black Diamond in shows that did not come to fruition because of the Covid-19 pandemic. Black Motion was supposed to perform in Bulawayo sometime in April last year while Black Diamond of the Summer Yomuthi fame, was supposed to make their way to the city in December last year. However, because of successive lockdowns that led to the suspension of shows and travel restrictions to curb the spread of Covid-19, the shows did not take place. 3D Events director, Mduduzi Mdlongwa said: “We booked Black Motion in 2019 around December in order for them to perform in Bulawayo in April 2020 thereabout. In order to book an artiste, one has to pay at least half the performance fees and we did that. “However, the lockdown happened in March and we had to postpone the show to May, but the situation continued up to now.” He said Black Diamond was booked last year at a time when they thought the Covid-19 storm was over. “December last year, we thought the pandemic was over and restrictions were going to be lifted. But to our disappointment, this show couldn’t happen as lockdowns were still in place and people couldn’t travel. So, we had to stall that show as well,” said Mdlongwa. He said he and his team are now working towards getting refunds from the artistes. “These bookings cost us almost R100 000 and that money is locked up somewhere. The only thing that we can do now is to try and get a refund for the deposits that we paid. It only makes sense as it seems like it’s (Covid-19) not going anywhere and we should put our efforts towards other things,” said a disheartened Mdlongwa. As an alternative, the promoter suggested that the Government lifts restrictions on shows and allow them (promoters) to operate. “Perhaps after the vaccinations and all, Government can lift restrictions and allow us to operate. Last year, we didn’t host any shows and this year, it looks like it’s going to be the same.” In order to cushion promoters, Mdlongwa suggested that the National Arts Council of Zimbabwe waiver some of the fees that they charge when hosting shows. “When Government lifts restrictions, for us who are importing art, they should at least waiver some or all the fees that we pay. These can amount to US$2 000 per show and wavering them will definitely bring some relief to promoters,” he said. 