The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
WAR veterans have said Zimbabwe’s Independence in 1980 did not only bring in political freedom but economic emancipation which came about as a result of Government’s empowerment programmes. The country celebrated 41 years of independence on Sunday with President Mnangagwa calling on Zimbabweans to be inspired by the occasion to preserve the gains of the liberation struggle. He said during the Second Republic, his Government would not betray the cause of the liberation struggle that made the country’s sons and daughters sacrifice their lives for the freedom Zimbabweans are now enjoying. The celebrations were held under the theme: “Zimbabwe at 41: Together, Growing our Economy for a Prosperous, Resilient and Inclusive Society.” In an interview yesterday Bulawayo provincial war veterans’ chairperson Cde Cephas Ncube urged Zimbabweans to embrace unity and diversity as the country celebrates its 41st Independence Anniversary. “The independence that we are enjoying today was brought about by the supreme sacrifices of our gallant sons and daughters. It is therefore, important that as we celebrate political freedom, we should also not forget the economic emancipation, which saw formally economically marginalised blacks being empowered in various sectors of the economy,” he said. “We should not forget the implementation of the Presidential Climate Proofed Pfumvudza/Intwasa Programme, Presidential Inputs Support Scheme, Command Agriculture, Presidential Horticulture Programme and Command Livestock programme among other initiatives.” Government was also implementing programmes to improve livestock, mechanisation of farms and irrigation development through rehabilitation of old schemes and dam construction as a way of boosting agricultural productivity. President Mnangagwa said the commemoration of the day was a celebration of the victory of the liberation struggle and that the construction of Mbuya Nehanda’s statue in Harare was a reminder to future generations of the need to be serving the country wholeheartedly with loyalty. He also touched on socio-economic issues affecting the country. Cabinet Ministers, senior Government officials, service chiefs, traditional leaders and members of opposition political parties attended the event but there was no participation by the general public at State House with the majority of Zimbabweans locally and abroad following proceedings on television or online. — @mashnets