The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
TWO people suffocated in a 21-metre well that they were trying to deepen. Mr Melusi Tshuma (29) and Mr Lumuno Nyoni (28) both from Mbenga 3, Tinde area under Chief Pashu had been contracted by Mr Taruvinga Sibanda to deepen his well. The well was not being used and had been sealed since last year until last Wednesday morning when the duo opened the lid to start work.
The duo proceeded to Mr Sibanda’s homestead in the morning and Mr Tshuma was the first to enter the well using a rope while Mr Nyoni and Mr Sibanda remained on the surface. Chronicle heard that moments after Mr Tshuma was lowered, Mr Nyoni and Mr Taruvinga heard him breathing heavily and tried to pull him out but failed. Sensing danger, Mr Nyoni tied a rope around his waist and secured it on a pole and entered the well intending to rescue his colleague.
After going halfway down, he called out to Mr Sibanda to pull him back as he was struggling to breathe but Mr Sibanda failed to pull him up. A neighbour Mr Dubani Nyoni rushed to the scene and helped Mr Sibanda to pull Mr Nyoni out but he was already dead. A Police sub-aqua unit from Binga was called to assist retrieve Mr Tshuma’s body but it failed to enter the well because it is narrow. Chief Pashu confirmed the double tragedy which he said had left the whole of Tinde community shocked. “I received a report that two men wanted to dig a well to deepen it and in the process suffocated. “The well had been closed for a long time and the two opened and immediately went in without first giving time for fresh air to circulate. “I heard that the owner insisted on them waiting before they could enter the well but they told him they had other commitments elsewhere hence they could not wait. Under normal circumstances they should have waited for fresh air to circulate because the well had been closed for a long time. They managed to pull one out but he was already dead while police have been trying to retrieve the other body,” said Chief Pashu. Mr Sibanda had met Mr Tshuma and Mr Nyoni in February at Tinde Business Centre and contracted them to dig his well.
Matabeleland North police spokesperson Inspector Glory Banda was not readily available for comment. — @ncubeleon