The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent THE Centre for Innovation & Technology (Cite) Zimbabwe is calling on musicians between the ages of 18 and 35 to participate in the Voice for Change musical project where artistes are being required to compose songs on social issues affecting communities. This is meant to empower young musicians who are between a rock and a hard place due to the ongoing pandemic that has left the arts sector partially operating. For the next year, each month will see the winning artiste with the best demo winning £165 (Euros) equivalent to US$200, a recording contract and music distribution on online stores. The top three artistes at the end of the programme, will get the assistance of video productions worth £1 500 (Euros) equivalent to US$1 800 each. Cite founder Zenzele Ndebele said the Voice for Change project will target musicians over a period of 15 months with focus being given to locals although productions of foreign-based artistes will also, be considered. “Voices for Change is something that we’ll be working on for the next 15 months. The idea is to work with young artistes, specifically those aged between 18 and 35. “We want to get these young people to record at least a song each on a societal issue. It can be corruption, human rights abuse, or anything that is happening in communities,” said Ndebele. He said young artistes should grab the opportunity with both hands by taking a leaf from great musicians in their songs context. “We are encouraging artistes to use their talent throughout the history of humankind. Musicians have always been the voice of reason since the liberation struggle as seen with the likes of the late Dr Oliver Mtukudzi, Solomon Skuza, and Lovemore Majaivana who through their music foresee the future and give advice. “Most of our young artistes sing bubble gum music that does not have a lifespan and a message thus we’re encouraging them to be more like the preachers and talk about issues that affect the societies. “This is a platform for the artistes to tap into spreading their music as the winners will have their music distributed on digital platforms that include Amazon, Google Play among others and this our contribution to the arts industry to let artistes recover from the pandemic,” added Ndebele. Earlier this year, Cite pledged close to US$25 000 towards supporting comedians and podcasters among other artistes. – @mthabisi_mthire