The Chronicle INTERNATIONAL Olympic Committee president Thomas Bach said that he is confident a large number of participants at the Tokyo 2020 Games will have received their Covid-19 vaccine in time for the event. Speaking at an IOC executive board press conference, Bach said that the IOC was “confident” that there will be a big number of athletes and delegate groups vaccinated by the time the Games start on July 23. His comments come as several National Olympic Committees have started their athlete vaccine programme, while others have put arrangements in place to ensure they are vaccinated before the games. “Therefore, we are not only confident, but we can already say the there will be a big number of the participants living in the Olympic Village will be vaccinated for their own safety but also in solidarity with the Japanese population,” Bach said. Last week, New Zealand started administering vaccines to its more than 200 athletes after the government put it in the category of national significance. The United States Olympic Committee and Paralympic Committee has not made vaccination mandatory, but has strongly encouraged more than 800 US athletes that are participating to receive the vaccine prior to the games. However, Swimming Australia said that some of its athletes must prepare to miss out on the vaccine after the Australian government restricted the roll-out of the AstraZeneca vaccine to people under 50, citing blood clotting concerns. Despite Bach’s confidence in vaccination numbers, he added that a lot of work needed to be done to help poorer nations to aid their vaccine rollout. “With regard to vaccination we see a big number and great progress, but we are also in contact with the NOCs where there is no vaccine yet, not even in the country, and trying to help,” Bach said. “There are a number of countries that will open up and offer assistance to poorer countries. But I don’t think we can arrive at a situation where we can say 100 percent (of athletes) will be vaccinated.” Last month, the Chinese Olympic Committee offered the IOC Covid-19 vaccination doses for participants at the Tokyo Olympics and the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics. Bach also brushed off concerns regarding the potential imminent state of emergency planned for Tokyo, the Osaka prefecture and neighbouring Hyogo prefecture. “It is restricted to your golden holiday week to prevent the spread of the virus. It’s a preventive measure and for this limited time. This is absolutely in line with the overall policy of the government, but it’s not related to the Olympic Games,” he said. — Sport Business