The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
MUSICIANS who performed at the Independence Virtual Gala at the weekend said it was important for Zimbabweans to celebrate self-rule as this is not something political but in remembrance of all those who fought to set the country free. Zimbabweans yesterday celebrated 41 years of self-rule, under the theme “Zim @41 Together, Growing the Economy for a Prosperous, Resilient and Inclusive Society.” On Saturday night there was a Virtual Gala that was beamed live on ZBCtv and online on Zimpapers Television Network, with an array of artistes who included Alick Macheso, Mark Ngwazi, Simon Mutambi, Romeo Gasa, Madlela Skhobokhobo and Juntal, Sandra Ndebele, Jeys Marabini and LMG Choir. Each artiste showed off their prowess much to the delight of Zimbabweans in the country and in the diaspora, as they united to celebrate Independence. Jeys Marabini who was among the 23 acts on the night said Independence was significant as people died for the country. “Independence is a good thing. It’s like celebrating a birthday. We’re remembering that people died for this country and yet they didn’t get a chance to celebrate Independence as Zimbabweans. “People look at Independence as a political manner, but Independence has nothing to do with that. It’s for all of us. I’ve relatives that died for this nation from my home area in Filabusi. Around the world, countries celebrate their independence as this is a very special day for them,” said Marabini. Above all, he said he enjoyed his performance at the gala. Iyasa director, Nkululeko Dube said young people sacrificed their lives for Independence. “This is a moment for youths to recognise what freedom is and that there are people who sacrificed their lives and their youth. They should be able to enjoy the day as born frees and as Iyasa, we are fully behind such,” said Dube. Madlela Skhobokhobo said they had a great time celebrating Independence. “I think we did the nation and where we come from proud. We really pulled out all the stops and with the feedback I’m getting, people enjoyed the performance,” said Madlela. He encouraged young artistes to push their art so that they can also get the chance to perform on national stages. “A dream never dies. That’s my encouragement. They should push their art and I believe that if you follow your calling, the day will come when you will showcase it for the world to see,” said Madlela.