The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
NEWLY licensed Lyeja-Nyayi community radio station is what has been missing to stir development in Hwange District, local traditional leaders have said. The Broadcasting Authority of Zimbabwe (BAZ) recently licensed Hwange based Lyeja-Nyayi among a host of other initiatives countrywide to start broadcasting. Lyeja-Nyayi Development Trust will cover Hwange, Dete, Jambezi, Kamativi and Victoria Falls and has been welcomed as an opening for the once marginalised Nambya, Nyanja, Dombe and Tonga languages which were previously side-lined in mainstream radio stations whose reception has been erratic over the years. Other community radio stations that BAZ has licensed are Ntepe Manama Community Radio Trust, Mbembesi Development Trust trading as Ingqangqa FM in Mbembesi, Nyangani Community Radio Trust trading as Nyangani FM, Shashe Community Radio Broadcasting Association in Beitbridge, and Chiredzi Rural Communities Development Initiative Trust trading as Avuxeni FM which covers Chikombedzi, Chiredzi, Rutenga, Mahenye and Malipati. Campus radio licences were also granted to Great Zimbabwe University (GZU) Midlands State University (MSU) and University of Zimbabwe (UZ), National University of Science and Technology (NUST), Lupane State University (LSU) and Harare Polytechnic College. Last November BAZ also licensed six new free to air private television stations marking a turning point in the country’s broadcasting history. The new stations should be operational within 18 months from date of licensing failure of which the licences will be automatically revoked as stipulated by the Broadcasting Services Act. Lyeja-Nyayi proprietors said they had set the ball rolling as they prepare to establish the station. Traditional leaders in Hwange said a common local communication channel has been the missing link in Hwange and the coming in of a radio station will enhance unity and development. “We are Nambya and we share values so we will be able to discuss from our various locations through the radio in our own language. At least developmental issues will be broadcast in local languages and communication will be easy hence people will be updated of what is happening in the country unlike before when current affairs eluded us,” said Chief Whange. He said the radio station will also act as an agent for preserving culture as people will have a sense of belonging emanating from programming done in their own language and appreciation. Chief Shana of Jambezi who is chairperson of the provincial chiefs’ assembly concurred adding that there will be need for proper research by the radio station through community elders about local cultural values to teach people. He said Hwange will now feel part of independent Zimbabwe as they will be able to listen to local programming hence help stir development both at local level and nationally. -@ncubeleon