The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter GOVERNMENT is assisting Mpopoma High School in Bulawayo to acquire a stand to set up a factory to manufacture uniforms, Primary and Secondary Education Minister Cain Mathema has said. The Minister said this is in line with the new thrust for schools to engage in income generating projects. Minister Mathema said some schools are already manufacturing PPEs that are essential in the fight against Covid-19. Speaking in Parliament during the question and-answer session, the Minister said Government is also working on ensuring that every school is empowered or is allowed to engage in business. “We have many schools that have large pieces of land and almost all our schools have a lot of land.  For example, Mpopoma High has 2 500 learners and all those learners still buy their school uniforms from other manufacturers yet at the same time we are teaching Fashion and Fabrics or Textile Technology,” he said. “I am in the middle of assisting that school to have a stand in Bulawayo opposite the teachers’ college near Mpilo UCE so that they are given a stand to start their own factory for our learners to learn in the classroom and see what their school is doing in terms of producing school uniforms.” Minister Mathema said schools like Chipindura in Bindura are into dairy production. “Every day they produce milk which they sell and they have used the monies to build classroom blocks and the administration block.  Every school, in addition to the assistance each school gets from the Ministry of Finance, every school is now allowed to engage with the private sector so that they have their own projects,” he said. “We have for instance Fatima in Lupane which has over 400ha of land but that piece of land is not being used commercially. So, each school has been allowed to start engaging the private sector, even to the extent of allowing a company to engage in commercial activities with the school on a build, operate and transfer (BOT) basis.” Minister Mathema said his ministry, through Treasury, has also procured some Covid-19 abatement equipment. “The majority of the beneficiary schools are the disadvantaged rural schools.  We have also encouraged our schools with capacity to prepare their own masks.  Some of the rural schools have been forthcoming in this regard,” he said. The Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education, working in conjunction with the Ministry of Health and Child Care and the National Task Force on Covid-19 came up with standard operating procedures in schools to protect learners and teachers from the contracting the pandemic. The procedures are meant to protect both the learners and the teachers from Covid-19 as they emphasise on preventative measures such as social distancing, wearing of masks and sanitising. @mashnets