The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
Born four years before Bulawayo giants Highlanders Football Club was formed, Khulu Amos Zikhali has seen it all. He says he loves the team that he has watched with his friends, from his adolescence until into his early 80s. So passionate is Khulu Zikhali about Bosso that he says he used to forgo attending church just to watch his beloved Bosso Ngenkani play at Emagumeni (Barbourfields Stadium). This past Sunday, Khulu Zikhali celebrated his 99th birthday at his homestead at the Methodist Village on the outskirts of Bulawayo with his children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren. His birthday cake had his picture and the Highlanders FC emblem and traditional colours of black and white, a confirmation of his love for Bosso. Khulu Zikhali spoke passionately about the club that is celebrating 95 years this year. “I came to the city when the likes of Siphambaniso Khumalo, Bernard Ngwenya and Irvin Gumede were playing. We’d pay six pence to watch them play. They used to play with Northern Rhodesia until the establishment of Mashonaland United (the now defunct Zimbabwe Saints). “We enjoyed watching football and would travel to watch the team in Harare and Hwange, all over the country, we’d follow the team,” said Khulu Zikhali. He admits that during the better part of his life, he would from time to time abscond church to watch Bosso play. “I used to miss church to watch football because I loved my team so much. I won’t hide and say I didn’t do it, I did,” said Khulu Zikhali. Reflecting on his life, he said he worked at Esborune Clothing in Bulawayo, having joined the company in 1945 as a messenger. Some years later, Khulu Zikhali then joined the British Metal Cooperation as a messenger, a job that he kept until the company closed in 1980 when the country attained independence. He has never worked ever since, dedicating his life to being a farmer at the homestead. “I remember fondly how we’d ride on cows (ukugada inzomba) in the Filabusi area. We’d look for honeybees and that would be our meal for the whole day. Life was simpler back then and we really enjoyed it,” said Khulu Zikhali. Now a devote Catholic at the St Gabriel Roman Catholic Church, Khulu Zikhali attributes reaching 99 years to the grace of the Almighty. “Being 99 years old has no formula. It’s all the grace of God who has kept me for such a long time. I’ve lived for so long and have so many grandchildren. This is just the grace of God, nothing else.” Khulu Zikhali, son of the late Magqina Zikhali and Zinganani Mbambo was born in 1922, in Filabusi, Avoca. He learnt at Dekezi Secondary school. He was married to the late Lina Nkomo and the couple had four children — Thembinkosi, Jabulani, Zithelo and Thandi. Only one, Jabulani is surviving.