The Chronicle AS the country eyes a bumper harvest, VAYA eLogistics says it has stepped up its range of logistics services to a growing number of its clients in Zimbabwe as it continues to work to solve the country’s transport and logistics challenges. Mr Lovemore Nyatsine, the chief executive officer of Vaya eLogistics, said the company has been efficiently moving goods and services such as essential medicines, food relief, water and commercial goods among others in the past year at a time most of the country was under lockdown, helping reduce the spread of the coronavirus. “Two years ago, we saw that 30 percent to 50 percent of the cost of goods in Africa goes into logistics, compared to six percent in Europe. “We are solving this problem by creating a digital logistics fulfilment marketplace. Our platform provides long haul, line haul and last mile logistics,” he said. Zimbabwe and Africa’s transport industry experiences the challenge of high costs emanating from inefficiencies arising from fragmented logistics, along with the demands of a rapidly evolving commercial environment and the need to provide a convenient service in an increasingly demanding market. Mr Nyatsine said Vaya eLogistics was leveraging on optimisation and automation of transportation to make logistics more efficient. “As a digital logistics aggregator, we have created a platform, which can move from the smallest of parcels to the largest in the most cost effective and efficient way,” he said. “We believe in optimisation and automation, which means that our system can automatically decide on the best option for transportation, maintenance and packaging in order to effectively deliver the goods to their destination,” he added. The introduction of Vaya eLogistics comes at a time when the global on-demand logistics market revenue is expected to rise to US$75 billion by 2030, from US$9.1 billion in 2019, due to the increasing efficiency of product transportation, the added convenience, cost-effective and real-time tracking advantages. Working with some of the biggest brands in the country, such as Simbisa Brands, BancABC, CIMAS, Vaya eLogistics has fulfilled orders to many offices, factories and homes in various cities and towns around the country. Mr Nyatsine said the company offers best prices and fast services with a determination to provide the best transport experience all the time. “Our focus is not on just the big brands, because we want to massify access to logistics, as only 10 percent of the Small to Medium Enterprises have access to their own logistics. We see our platform as an accelerator and enabler that will achieve logistics inclusion sooner rather than later,” he said. Vaya eLogistics services can be accessed via a web-based portal (B2B) for the corporates and an on-demand mobile app, for individual customers. This helps drive access, transparency, efficiency and affordability. The on-demand service has value added benefits, such as track and trace devices, insurance, data analytics and trade finance. Going forward, Mr Nyatsine said the company is targeting to move more goods and services in the agribusiness, pharmaceuticals, eCommerce and fast-moving consumer goods value chains.