The Chronicle JUST as many TV shows such as Isibaya closed their last chapter, a new era started. Monday night was the big première of the much-anticipated South African series, Diep City, which stars Mduduzi Mabaso and Dawn Thandeka King among others. After just one epic episode of the show that replaced all popular Isibaya, TV viewers have already fallen in love with the show, which tells the tale and struggles of four young women trying to make their way in the world. The series focuses on disillusioned young women forced into crime while in high school, just to make ends meet. The story revolves around the trials, tribulations and exploits of Nokuthula “Nox” Jele, a small-time burglar and hustler played by former Scandal! actress Nozuko Ncayiyane. Diep City was created by the award-winning creator and director of popular drama Lockdown, Mandla N of Black Brain Productions who told Daily Sun that people are going to be blown away. “The secret recipe behind great storytelling is a mix of several ingredients — a relatable storyline, great casting and a passion for filmmaking,” he said. “We expect viewers to be blown away by Nox’s story, which is one of poverty, heartbreak, redemption, and hope, all encompassed into one crime thriller.” In a statement, the channel director for local entertainment channels at M-Net, Nomsa Philiso, said: “It’s always sad when a show that was popular and loved ends, as is the case with Isibaya. However, times change and television is about adopting and adapting. “As Mzansi Magic, we are thrilled about the new partnership with Black Brain Productions. They will be bringing in fresh content that is innovative and captivating.” Reacting to Diep City’s first episode, this is what fans had to say: “What a great start, but let’s give praise to Mlindo’s voice on the background,” commented one Shaba Mabeza. Jabulani MacDonald applauded the production company: “This is different from the usual telenovelas we watch. Mandla N did a great job.” Actress Zenande Mfenyana said: “Black Brain has done it again! #DiepCityMzansi is too nice! I’m hooked! The acting, scoring and cinematography.” Diep City is not the only show that premièred on Monday. The Station, The Estate as well as uBettina Wethu also hit the screens for the first time. Rockville also made its return on Sunday. — DailySun/TimesLive .