The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Chronicle Reporter
THE government of Japan has contributed US$1,25 million through the World Food Programme (WFP) to support food insecure communities in Zimbabwe that have been severely impacted by climate shocks and Covid-19. Most of the money will be used to address the root causes of food insecurity and achieve Sustainable Development Goal 2 aimed at ending all forms of hunger and malnutrition. In total, the donation will assist a targeted 11 080 people in Matobo and Mount Darwin districts through building community and household assets. Communities will use the funds to construct small dams, fish ponds, dip tanks and embark on water conservation activities such as by filling gullies, making terraces or soil bunds and planting trees, among others. In a statement, the WFP country director and representative, Ms Francesca Erdelmann said the donation will help improve food security in Zimbabwe. She said Japan’s contribution comes at a time when many in the country are struggling to feed themselves as a result of successive droughts and economic challenges worsened by Covid-19. “This contribution will enable Zimbabwean communities to move out of food insecurity and towards sustainable livelihoods. It will not only provide immediate access to food support for the most vulnerable, but will also sustainably address the long-term food security of rural communities by rehabilitating and building productive community assets such as small weir dams, nutrition gardens, cattle dip tanks and fish ponds,” she said. Japan Ambassador to Zimbabwe Mr Satoshi Tanaka said his Government will continue to support the most vulnerable communities in the country. He said the projects will focus on improving their nutrition and building their resilience. According to the latest Zimbabwe Vulnerability Assessment Committee, ZimVAC report, more than 2,4 million people in rural areas are food insecure, a 12 percent increase compared to the previous farming season. -@thamamoe