The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent COMEDIAN and actor Madam Boss (real name Tyra Chikocho) has been appointed as Ingwebu Breweries brand ambassador with the company saying they want to penetrate other markets, through her. Besides Madam Boss, radio personality and comedian Babongile Sikhonjwa and model Ben Chest were appointed. Madam Boss let the cat out of the bag last week to her over 800 000 fans on Facebook expressing her excitement. “Guys, it’s so overwhelming and I’m so excited. Ingwebu Breweries, thank you for believing and trusting the Madam Boss brand to be your brand ambassador and influencer. I really appreciate,” said Madam Boss in a video drop. She promised the company that she would do them proud. The Bulawayo-based company’s managing director, Dumisani Mhlanga said they want to penetrate the Harare market hence Madam Boss, who has close to a million followers on social media, was the perfect tonic. “We asked ourselves how we’d penetrate the Harare market and sell our Royal Mahewu products there. This is why we chose Madam Boss as she has over 800 000 followers on social media. We followed her and saw that she wasn’t a controversial person,” said Mhlanga. To service the southern region, Mhlanga said Ingwebu Breweries has Sikhonjwa and Ben Chest. “We have our own brand ambassadors for the Bulawayo market such as Sikhonjwa and Ben Chest and our partners, Skyz Metro FM through their DJs Bkay and Manurse. Madam Boss is meant to help us penetrate the Harare market,” explained Mhlanga. He said including Madam Boss was part of their strategy to spread the Ingwebu Breweries products’ reach across Zimbabwe. “We want to grow the brand and don’t want our products to be confined to Bulawayo. We want the products to be found in Mutare and other parts of Zimbabwe as well as other countries.” Following news of Madam Boss’ appointment, some hailed Ingwebu for its turnaround strategy. “Ingwebu has changed its marketing strategy. I was so excited to buy Ingwebu at Gutu Mpandawana growth point during Easter holiday,” commented one. 