The Chronicle Michelle Nyanzira, Chronicle Reporter
THE Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education is investigating the refusal by Whitestone Primary School in Bulawayo to enrol a pupil for Grade One because he is epileptic. Dylan Tendai Mhlanga (6) was in an ECD class last year at the school and was offered a Grade One place only for the school authorities to reverse the decision allegedly because he is epileptic. This was despite reports compiled by an occupational therapist and an educational psychologist stating that Dylan is suitable to progress to Grade One with the support of remedial teaching and medical support for his medical condition. In a telephone interview, the director of communications and advocacy in the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education, Mr Taungana Ndoro said the ministry is investigating the matter. He urged schools to be inclusive so that pupils with special needs are not denied the right to education. Dylan’s mother, Mrs Nyaradzo Mhlanga said they received an email on November 12 last year inviting them to the Grade One orientation day. She said on that day school authorities gave them a list of uniforms and other things needed at school. Mrs Mhlanga said on November 24 the school sent a letter expressing concerns about Dylan’s medical condition and indicated they could not offer him a place. “I would like to know which policy was used to assess and de-register my child because according to the constitution of Zimbabwe it is unlawful to de-register a child just like that,” said Mrs Mhlanga. The school authorities refused to comment but in letters sent to the family they said Dylan’s condition is of great concern to the school and requires specialist attention. They said it would be difficult for the staff to manage as his condition poses a safety concern to himself and other pupils. “He appears to be facing challenges with his learning. His manipulative skills, co-ordination and spatial awareness are poor and of concern,” wrote the headmaster Mr Tex Harding. He advised Dylan’s parents to have him assessed by an Occupational therapist and a Pediatric Neurologist. Mrs Mhlanga said the school authorities offered a remedial tutor to teach and assess Dylan for school readiness when schools were closed due to lockdown. The remedial tutor only identified as Mrs Rennie in her report said Dylan had not successfully mastered all the skills necessary to complete ECD and that was hindering his learning of Grade One content. “Dylan has found the reasoning work very difficult, he cannot use a pair of scissors, stand on one leg, kick or throw a ball with control,” said Mrs Rennies in her assessment report. Mrs Mhlanga said Mrs Rennies’ observations did not warrant denying her son a place at the school. An occupational therapist, Mrs Rebecca Mukombe in her report said Dylan was suitable to progress to Grade One with the support of remedial teaching and support for his medical condition. She said Dylan made progress in all areas of development and with continued therapy and support he can have a successful Grade One year in 2021. Paediatrician Professor Michael Okabue Ikeogu and Educational Psychologist Mrs Sharon Gomera’s reports stated that Dylan may be enrolled for Grade One while he receives both occupational and educational therapies. Mrs Mhlanga said after all the assessments and positive reports from the different professionals, the school authorities remain adamant that they cannot offer Dylan a Grade One place. — @michieroxy.