The Chronicle Yvonne Ncube, Chronicle Reporter
BORN with one leg, a 14-year-old found comfort in an artificial leg, but his salvation was short-lived. He got the artificial leg when he was six, but as the years have gone by he needs a replacement but his family does not have the money to buy another one. Mthokozisi Ndlovu who lives in Dandadema under Chief Tshugulu in Nkayi, Matabeleland North, is grateful that at least he got a chance to play around with other children when well-wishers gave him the artificial leg. His father who shares the same name with his son, said Mthokozisi is not only one-legged but has a speech and hearing impairment. “Mthokozisi started using the leg when he was little but now it is becoming smaller because he is becoming bigger. At first he didn’t want to remove it because he felt like it was part of him but as he became bigger it also became challenging and unbearable to use,” said Mr Ndlovu. He said using the aide of clutches was challenge for the boy so he opted to crawl. “Using a clutches became tiring for him as he had to leap all the time. So ended up opting to crawl. However, crawling damages his knees,” said Mr Ndlovu. He said Mthokozisi has since stopped going to school because he could not endure the 5km distance to Hompane Primary School. “He could not shoulder the distance every single day so we decided to let him rest and stop going to school. There is not much harm done since he cannot hear and there is no sign language at school,” he said. Mr Ndlovu said his son has a dream to learn sign language so that he can be able to communicate with other people. Nkayi South MP, Stars Mathe appealed for help on behalf of Mthokozisi. “Mthokozisi has suffered enough. The burden he carries is not for his age. Those who wish to help him can contact me on 0772 322 656/ 0716 045 003.” The MP said a number of people with disabilities in Nkayi are facing challenges, hence the need for the teaching of sign language. “l learnt with great concern that Nkayi South, especially Ward 22, has so many people living with disabilities. In this ward alone, there are 31 people living with disabilities whom l started registering two weeks back and most of them are school-going girls. Presently, there is no school for them in Nkayi and the dire need for sign language teaching is rife,” she said.-@SeehYvonne