The Chronicle Yvonne Ncube/Mthabisi Tshuma, Chronicle Reporters
THE Broadcasting Authority of Zimbabwe (BAZ) is set to license nine more community radio stations and three campus radios stations and has pledged to procure equipment for six newly licensed community radio stations. The stations will be licensed after the authority reviewed its Broadcasting frequency allotment plan for community and campus radio broadcasting services. New community radio station licences will be awarded to Tsholotsho, Selous, Gutu, Wedza, Shurugwi, Zvishavane, Zvimba, Mutawatawa and Chivi with all holding a coverage capacity of 40km. BAZ last year, invited applications for 10 community radio stations, 19 campus radio stations and six TV stations in a move towards opening up the broadcasting sector to new independent players. “It is hereby notified that the Broadcasting Authority of Zimbabwe, has in terms of Paragraph 4(3) of the First Schedule to the Broadcasting Services Act [Chapter 12:06] varied the Broadcasting Frequency Allotment Plan published in General Notice 148 of 2020 under provision of Community and Campus Broadcasting Services in the FM broadcasting band, by repealing Schedule 6 and substituting it with the below and amending Schedule 7 and 8,” read the Allotment plan. In an interview, BAZ acting chief executive officer Engineer Mathius Chakanyuka said the authority was working closely with partners to ensure that the community radio stations receive equipment to enable them to go on air. “We expect the newly licensed players to start broadcasting within the period of eighteen months from date of licensing. “The Government allocated Transmedia funds to the tune of $30 million dollars to assist in the procurement of transmitters. Disbursement is imminent. On the other hand, the Government has partnered with UNESCO and is currently working on modalities to provide both studio and transmission equipment,” said Eng Chakanyuka. “As the regulator, BAZ is also going to provide both studio and transmission equipment through the broadcasting fund. So it is our hope that the the first batch of the equipment will be in the country before the end of May 2021.” Eng Chakanyuka said when the 18 months passes without the community radio station airing, they will be engaged to understand challenges and if they are not rectified, the licence will be revoked. “Towards the end of the statutory 18 months period, the Authority will engage licensees so as to understand their challenges and if they cannot be resolved, the Authority will ultimately initiate licence cancellation process as provided for in the Broadcasting Services Act. “Licensing of Community Radio Stations is a historical initiative, or rather a big milestone within the Zimbabwean Broadcasting Industry,” he said. Eng Chakanyuka praised President Mnangagwa’s leadership and empowering the media sector during his rule. “Since 1980 there was no Community Radio and I would like to say thumbs up to the Second Republic for its unwavering drive to free up the airwaves and promote freedom of expression. “This is a great move towards the realisation of a 3-tier broadcasting system which is an International standard for broadcasting services,” said Eng Chakanyuka. Last year BAZ awarded three licences to Ntepe-Manama Community Radio Trust, Mbembesi Development Trust and Nyangani Community Radio Trust. Last month, three more community radio stations were granted licences and these include Shashe Community Radio Broadcasting Association which covers Beitbridge and Shashe, Chiredzi Rural Communities Development Initiative Trust trading as Avuxeni FM which covers Chikombedzi, Chiredzi, Rutenga, Mahenye and Malipati and to Lyeja-Nyayi Development Trust that covers Hwange and Victoria Falls. All the community radio stations are expected to be fully operational and found on the airwaves by 18 months of being granted the licence to operate. BAZ has so far awarded six academic institutions compass broadcasting licences which include the National University of Science and Technology, Lupane State University, Great Zimbabwe University, University of Zimbabwe, Midlands State University and Harare Polytechnic College. Last November six new free-to-air private television stations were licensed. Zimpapers Television Network (ZTN), a subsidiary of diversified media group Zimbabwe Newspapers (1980) Ltd, was one of the channels awarded a free-to-air television licence. The other five are Rusununguko Media (Pvt) Ltd — trading as NRTV, Jester Media trading as 3K TV, Acacia Media Group — trading as Kumba TV, Fairtalk Communications — trading as Ke Yona TV — and Channel Dzimbahwe — trading as Channel D. -@SeehYvonne/@mthabisi_mthire