The Chronicle REBEL English clubs are already cracking under pressure casting doubt on the formation of the controversial European Super League, say top sources in Germany. Respected news outlet Bild has published claims that “doubts have grown in several English clubs in the last 24 hours”.
A massive fan backlash is believed to be one of the major factors behind half of the six Premier League teams involved having second thoughts. This latest development follows rumours that Chelsea and Manchester City only learned of the plan to form a breakaway league last week. They, along with Liverpool, Manchester United, Tottenham and Arsenal comprise the “Big Six” elite in England who have signed up for the “biggest shake-up in soccer” in thirty years. In total, 12 European teams have announced the setting up of a new franchise league in which they will be free of relegation fears. The bombshell announcement has drawn stinging criticism from governments, governing bodies, supporters and rival teams around the world. Bild claims there could be as many as three Premier League clubs getting cold feet and that if they break ranks it will bring the whole idea crashing down before it even gets going. The remaining 14 top-flight clubs met today to discuss how to fight back against the proposals and how they will challenge the six rebels.
A Premier League statement said: “The Premier League, alongside The FA, met with clubs today to discuss the immediate implications of the Super League proposal. “The 14 clubs at the meeting unanimously and vigorously rejected the plans for the competition.
“The Premier League is considering all actions available to prevent it from progressing, as well as holding those Shareholders involved to account under its rules. “The League will continue to work with key stakeholders including fan groups, Government, Uefa, The FA, EFL, PFA and LMA to protect the best interests of the game and call on those clubs involved in the proposed competition to cease their involvement immediately. “The Premier League would like to thank fans and all stakeholders for the support they have shown this week on this significant issue. The reaction proves just how much our open pyramid and football community means to people.” Chelsea fans are among those outraged at their club’s behaviour. They have asked for banners inside the club’s Stamford Bridge stadium to be taken down and will protest outside the ground this evening before the home game against Brighton. And as revealed by SunSport, the club’s players were left shocked, gutted and confused when they were told the club was part of the Dirty Dozen. Blues chairman Bruce Buck called a meeting of the players in an attempt to explain why they were signing up to the European Super League. But the news did not go down well with the squad, with individuals concerned about the damage it threatens to do to the game. Those fears only grew when it became clear Uefa were threatening to throw them out of the Champions League. Liverpool were due to stage a Zoom call with the owners, Fenway Sports Group, this morning to update and inform the club’s employees about the Super League plans. But this meeting was canned soon after full-time of last night’s 1-1 draw at Leeds. Chief executive Billy Hogan sent an email to staff on Monday to begin to explain the club’s actions — which have drawn particular criticism from Sky Sports pair Jamie Carragher and Gary Neville. Skipper Jordan Henderson will lead an emergency meeting between Premier League captains to discuss their response. The Reds midfielder, 30, is a well-respected figure within English football, having led footballers’ reaction during the NHS crisis last year.
And the England man will step up to the plate again to get the 20 captains — including those of the rebel clubs — talking. Prime Minister Boris Johnson, writing in The Sun, assured English football fans he will do all in his power to stop the Super League from going ahead. He said: “You only need a pulse to know that football is not a brand or a product. In fact it’s so much more than even a sport. “A year of empty stadiums has reminded us all that football without fans is an altogether more anaemic spectacle. “It is your game — and you can rest assured that I’m going to do everything I can to give this ludicrous plan a straight red.”
And the PM reiterated his promise by threatening new laws surrounding the plot — and backed Premier League bosses to kick the so-called “Big Six” out it they want to. Johnson vowed to do all he could to stop it from going ahead in a meeting with top footie bosses. Downing Street said today the PM “expressed his solidarity with football fans and agreed they must always be at the heart of any decisions about the future of the game”. The PM urged clubs who were reported to be wobbling to pull back from the brink. – The Sun