The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Chronicle reporter
A 12-YEAR-OLD boy from Bulawayo allegedly committed suicide while on his way to school. Bulawayo provincial police spokesperson Inspector Abednico confirmed the incident which occurred in Pumula South Suburb on Monday around 8AM. The boy was with his nine-year-old brother whom he asked to proceed to school before hanging himself using a red satchel belt. His younger brother walked a few steps and when realising that his brother was no longer following him, he walked backwards only to find him hanging from a tree branch. Investigations are still underway to establish what could have led the boy to take his own life. Insp Ncube called on parents and guardians to invest more time in the lives of their children to be in touch with everything happening. Insp Ncube said it was worrying to see a trend whereby teenagers commit suicide and called for stronger support systems within families and communities. “On April 24, 2021 at around 8AM… at a bushy area near Good Hope Private College, the deceased removed his school uniform and put on plain clothes,” said Insp Ncube. “He instructed his younger brother to proceed to school and told him that he would follow later. The deceased’s younger brother walked for a few metres and realised that his brother was not following. He went back and found the deceased hanging from a tree branch.” Insp Ncube said the boy screamed and drew the attention of an unnamed informant who went to check what was happening. “The informant made a report at ZRP Pumula and together with CID Homicide and CID Scenes of Crime attended the scene,” he said. “The body was inspected and no injuries were observed and the body was taken to the United Bulawayo Hospitals for post-mortem. Police continue to encourage parents or guardians to have time with their children and understand their day-to-day activities,” he said. Zimbabwe has the 13th highest suicide rate in the world amid reports that cases have been on the rise, making suicide the 14th leading cause of death in the country. Defined as the act of intentionally causing one’s own death by ingesting pesticide, hanging or using firearms; suicide is a result of mental disorders including depression, psychosis and substance use disorder. Some of the causes include feelings of hopelessness for better outcomes. Medical experts say serious depression can be effectively controlled with modern drugs and other medical techniques, but it is necessary that those who are drifting into suicidal depression are identified and referred to competent medical practitioners or psychiatric specialists as early as possible.-@thamamoe