The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
GOVERNMENT has said citizens’ security is guaranteed as the country celebrates its 41st independence anniversary tomorrow. The Government also warned members of the public against violating Covid-19 prevention measures by converging in illegal gatherings. In a statement yesterday, Home Affairs and Cultural Heritage Minister Kazembe Kazembe said the public should freely enjoy the 41st independence celebrations while observing the country’s laws. “As the nation commemorates the 41st anniversary of independence, the Ministry of Home Affairs and Cultural Heritage assures Zimbabweans that their security and safety is guaranteed throughout the period and beyond. Zimbabweans should therefore feel free to conduct all lawful activities in a peaceful manner and taking into consideration that the country like the rest of the world is grappling with the global Covid-19 pandemic,” said Minister Kazembe. He called on the Zimbabweans to adhere to Covid-19 prevention measures including wearing of masks. Minister Kazembe said police will be out in full force to ensure that there is adherence to Covid-19 prevention measures. “My ministry has implored the Commissioner General of Police to ensure that the Government’s Covid-19 regulations are complied with to the letter. My Ministry is concerned by church and funeral gatherings which are openly exceeding the stipulated figure of 50. Some church congregants and mourners are reportedly clashing with the police who are obviously coming in to disperse gatherings which in most cases are exceeding 1 000,” said Minister Kazembe. He said such public gatherings could become Covid-19 super spreaders and the law will take its course without fear or favour on errant gatherings which expose the public to the Covid-19 pandemic. Minister Kazembe said Government is aware of planned illegal protests by the MDC Alliance and its affiliate civil society organisations and has instructed Comm Gen Matanga to act on them. “The police and other security services will be on high alert and ready to defend the country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. May I warn all those who are planning and coordinating these illegal demonstrations that the law will take its course. Local and internationally based organisations who are providing funding through individuals and the so-called civil organisations’ proxies are duly warned to stop formenting disorder in the country and will be held accountable for any criminal acts perpetrated by groups who are obviously bidding for opposition political parties in the country,” said Minister Kazembe. He said the public should ignore messages being circulated by the MDC Alliance not to celebrate and observe the country’s 41st independence anniversary. Minister Kazembe warned drug peddlers that the law will catch up with them. “I am aware that there are syndicates involving local and foreigners who are using the country’s points of entry and exit to engage in drug trafficking. The syndicates will be dealt with once and for all by law enforcement officers,” Minister Kazembe. He said law enforcement agents are dealing with cases of criminals that are masquerading as uniformed forces to commit crimes. Minister Kazembe commended the public for working with cops in weeding out crime in communities. “We kindly urge the public to report any suspicious activities in that regard and as much as possible, provide evidence. Whenever there is a case of robbery, let us allow the police to do their investigations before making conclusions. Anyone found on the wrong side of the law will be prosecuted regardless of their status in the society. Zimbabwe is a peace-loving country and our uniformed forces are doing a great job in maintaining that,” said Minister Kazembe. “The country’s independence makes meaning if there is law and order which is underpinned by police visibility and cooperation from the public. My Ministry applauds the public for continuously working together with the police to tackle the malady of crime in the country. Finally, the Ministry of Home Affairs and Cultural Heritage wishes all Zimbabweans a crime and accident free 41st Independence anniversary. Let’s stay safe and remember that Covid-19 requires us to act responsibly and above all observe and comply with the Government of Zimbabwe’s safety and security regulations.” — @nqotshili