The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
ZIMBABWE Boxing Federation (ZBF) is drafting conclusive programmes that will complement the vision of the newly elected executive to make boxing popular and attract corporate partners. Stephen Masiyambumbi, the ZBF technical director, said they are drawing a detailed calendar that will factor in regional and international competition dates in which they might send local participants. He said staging a number of competitions across the country is one of their ways to promote the sport. Newly elected ZBF president Festus Chinezhira Dumbu said his plan is to come up with a framework for boxing development that will bring regular and frequent successes of boxers in national championships, regional games, continental championships and the Olympic Games. Dumbu was confident that this would create fertile opportunities for businesses, making it easier for corporates to partner ZBF and make boxing lucrative. Masiyambumbi said their calendar will include training programmes for coaches and match officials in line with their objectives of popularising the sport. “We’ve asked provinces to submit their proposed competition dates so that we factor them in the final calendar which will be out by end of the week. “The calendar will also be sent to the Sports and Recreation Commission. It’s an exciting calendar that we are drawing as we want to make boxing exciting. “The programmes we are planning will have a bias towards youth development with the hope that schools will soon be allowed to compete,” said Masiyambumbi. The resumption of boxing activities will be done in accordance with recommended Covid-19 standard operating protocols, with the ZBF warning clubs against training without testing boxers. “Those who will flout the Covid-19 standard operating protocols and start training without testing boxers will be punished. “Our emphasis as per Government’s directive is to make sure that the sport returns in a safe environment. “Besides testing before the start of training activities, boxers will also be subjected to tests when they come for competitions which we want to have at least twice a month so that our boxers make up for lost time,” Masiyambumbi said. — @ZililoR