The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
DIVISION One clubs have called for an urgent extraordinary general meeting after accusing the Zifa Southern Region board led by Andrew Tapela of not consulting them on plans about the return of their league. In a petition dated March 30, the clubs say their sponsors are threatening to pull the plug because of lack of clarity on when and how football in the second tier league is set to return. The clubs said the extraordinary general meeting should be held within 21 days. “Sponsors of our clubs are demanding updates on developments in our football resumption plans and Covid-19 protocols and activities. Some sponsors are considering pulling out due to lack of clarity on developments and lack of updates, as a result of non-communication by the Zifa Southern Region,” reads the petition, a copy of which is in possession of Chronicle Sport. According to the petition, clubs are in the dark about general football guidelines and activation of regulations as contained in Fifa guidelines. Confusion was abounding how clubs should proceed due to lack of proper interpretation, lack of guidance and absence of common binding principles. “Clubs are at the centre of any activity in the league, but they were not consulted or requested to submit their views in the drafting of Standard Operation Procedures that were crafted jointly with other regions and currently awaiting approval by the Zimbabwe Football Association. “Clubs are the key stakeholders in the regional chain. Preparations at all levels, which are being made for the resumption of football, disregard this prime position. The situation right now between clubs and the Zifa Southern Region executive is that of us and them. Therefore the requested meeting is to find common ground before the annual general meeting,” reads the petition. The clubs, according to the petition, appreciate all standard protocols employed to deal with the Covid-19 pandemic, but they have other concerns that are beyond the Zifa executive committee’s control, which are a direct responsibility of the regional board. “In this regard, clubs in the Zifa Southern Region do hereby petition for an extraordinary general meeting from an informed position. While the list of concerns is not exhaustive, the clubs feel the aforementioned are enough grounds to take the agreed position,” reads the petition.