The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Gwanda Correspondent
INCREASING cases of drug abuse among youths in Gwanda town has triggered a public outcry with community leaders calling for urgent action. The abused drugs include mbanje, probably the most abused, crystal methamphetamine commonly known as mutoriro, dombo or guka, a cough syrup called BronCleer (bronco) and illicit drink known as musombodhiya in street lingo. Mbanje, bronco and mutoriro are easily found on the streets of Gwanda town. This news crew observed over the week that recreational facilities that include Gwanda High School grounds and Pelandaba Stadium have been turned into meeting points for youths who want to hook up on drugs. The lungs can be damaged by any drug that is smoked, causing diseases like emphysema, lung cancer, and chronic bronchitis. Opioids depress breathing, which can worsen asthma. Many drugs can cause long-term kidney damage, including kidney failure, which is life -threatening. According to the police, the illicit drugs in circulation in the country are depressants, stimulants and hallucinogens, narcotics, skin lighteners, body enlargement products and sex enhancers. Residents have called on police to intensify their operations against drug peddlers and abusers. They said drug dealers were selling dangerous drugs to even children which is very disturbing. Gwanda Residents Association deputy secretary Mr Wellington Nare said the level of drug abuse in the mining town has become a cause for concern. “As the Residents Association we are worried about the level of drug abuse in Gwanda by young people. It is a bad development for our future. We therefore call upon our law enforcement agents to take stern measures against those who are selling these drugs to young people,” said Mr Nare. Mrs Fadzai Moyo said Gwanda Municipality needed to avail facilities where youths can keep themselves busy. “We call upon our council and other stakeholders to come up with rehabilitation and recreational facilities that will keep our youths occupied so that they do not resort to drug abuse. We also urge young people to desist from using drugs to relieve stress or pressures as they have long term negative impacts which include brain damage or loss of life,” said Mrs Moyo. In an interview, Ministry of Health and Child Care National Mental Health Occupational Therapist, Mr Brighton Mufakwadziya said the ministry is working flat out to ensure they address the drug abuse issue after launching the National Drug Master Plan on April 13. “Chronic use of some drugs can lead to both short and long-term changes in the brain, which can lead to mental health issues including paranoia, depression, anxiety, aggression, hallucinations, mood and anxiety disorders,” said Mr Mufakwadziya. Centre for Health Communication Zimbabwe (CHCZ) Communications and advocacy officer Ms Andile Tshuma said mining communities have become victims of influx of drug peddlers. “Drug peddlers are targeting mining communities where forex is circulating and we have a very serious crisis. The latest problem drug is crystal meth, some call it the bulb or guka makafala. We are losing our young people to it,” she said. Ms Tshuma said the problem has been in big cities but it is now creeping to smaller communities. “As CHCZ we are on a behaviour change campaign drive where we are targeting youths on social media platforms and sharing information on the dangers of drug abuse and a life of intoxication. We are also sharing information on help centres for communities,” said Ms Tshuma. She urged members of the public to report any suspicious activity to the police as part of measures to fight drug abuse. “It is community members that are introducing drugs to our youths, they must be reported. This crisis can be averted if people in communities are working together to expose criminals who are the drug peddlers,” said Ms Tshuma. — @mthabisi_mthire.