The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
HOUSE muso, Mzoe 7, who is visibly on the right path with his music career, is set to release a single titled Mjolo the Pandemic on April 30. Mzoe 7 said the track, the second single from his forthcoming album, United Country Africa (UCA), will be released with visuals. It is a track about challenges people face in relationships. “Each one of us is struggling in relationships (mjolo) these days, especially our generation, because of pressure from friends, society and social media. The song has the beat by fast-rising producers Conga Brothers and a feel of Shekinah’s guitar. “The visuals have been just recorded observing Covid-19 rules. They were shot by Rasquesity,” said Mzoe 7. He said he is grateful to be working closely with Rasquesity saying he is “one dedicated brother who has been working hard to produce clean visuals for the country” as shown by visuals of Imbokodo by Novuyo Seagirl featuring La Dee, and Daideng by Amany. “Last year, we won the best video for Asambeni at the BAA awards and that was a great achievement for Rasquesity and I,” he said. The forthcoming single launch comes at a time Mzoe 7 is rising with corporates throwing their weight behind him. Among these are Nyaradzo Group and the National Arts Council of Zimbabwe (NACZ) who recently commended him. Congratulating Mzoe 7 for his win at the Zimbabwe Music Awards (Best Dance/House/Kwaito Award), Nyaradzo, through an email sent to him by the company’s group chief executive officer, Philip Mataranyika, said the artiste’s music has matured over the years. “On behalf of the Nyaradzo Group management and staff and on my own behalf, I would like to congratulate you on winning the Best Dance/House/Kwaito Award at the recently held Zimbabwe Music Awards. “Your dedication and hard work has really paid off. As Nyaradzo Group, we are extremely happy about your achievement. Well done,” read the email. Also appreciative of Mzoe 7s growth were NACZ. “The management at Jacaranda Culture and Media Corporation would like, on behalf of the NACZ and the general arts fraternity in Zimbabwe, to express heartfelt gratitude on your performance in the True Love rendition for the Nama Legends edition. “We truly appreciate your dedication to producing vocals and videos amid all the Covid-19 restrictions. Your verse added a flair that made the classic song relevant to the urban youths of today,” said Nama executive director Napoleon Nyanhi. – @mthabisi_mthire