The Chronicle Lingani Nyika, Showbiz Reporter
All is set for the inaugural Miss Independence pageant taking place at Chinotimba Hall in Victoria Falls this afternoon with 12 models set to showcase their talent. Entertainment at the event that is being held as a belated Independence Day celebration, will be provided by Victoria Falls musicians Ovido, Skaal, Skills Boi and Breezo. In celebrating 41 years of Independence this year, Victoria Falls Youth Association (Vifaya) together with Casper Mpofu as the organising co-ordinator, have organised this pageant to promote and support the girl child through empowerment and development of personal skills and talents. “By engaging young females from the age of 16 and with about 12 contestants already registered, Vifaya seeks to celebrate ubuntu, beauty and the hard work of Zimbabwean women,” organisers said. One of the event organisers, Yvonne Mambume said the pageant will provide opportunities for female youths to be empowered through their talents as they involve themselves in national development programmes. “This show provides opportunities for sustainable livelihoods and decent work for all young people while assisting them to attain the knowledge and skills that will enable them to effectively participate in developing their communities and nation at large. “The pageant is about the tapping of talent lying idle in Vic Falls,” Mambume said. Co-ordinator Mpofu said: “As a trust, we are trying to nurture and give the young children a training ground to enable them to reach the professional level. At the same time, it’s a platform to create employment and keep the youths away from engaging in anti-social activities such as prostitution and drug abuse.” He said the trust also hopes to develop the sport and arts industries by assisting young talented members of the community who wish to venture into either sport or arts. “The aim is to develop modelling which is a profession on its own and at the same time create a platform that will generate income for the young people. We also want to grow the sports and arts industry,” he said. – @NyikaLingani