The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
Chibuku Road to Fame 2002 runner up, Cosmas Mpofu says despite the challenging musical environment, he has not looked back since he launched his career over 20 years ago. The rhumba musician who relocated to South Africa in 2007 in search of greener pastures has largely remained quiet despite having 14 albums to his name. Some of his albums include Zihlobo, Fakisandla sakho baba, Speedlimit, Khangelokwakho, Izinto aAzivumi, Intando KaSathane, Sekusele Elokufa, Ingozi Ayijami and Amawhatsup. Chronicle Showbiz recently caught up with the musician who said he is eking out a living in the neighbouring country through his music. He said he has never sought any other employment other than music. “I’ve been able to eke out a living from music. I’ve been moving around various areas marketing the music to people who then buy our CDs after seeing us performing. “We also hold gigs and get hired so that’s made life easy,” said Mpofu. He said he is grateful for the Chibuku Road to Fame platform as it was an eye-opener. “This competition which I won at the provincial level at Amakhosi Theatre saw me represent my province at national level in Harare and I came second. The competition really opened my eyes to the realities of the music world,” he said. The musician recently released his 14th album titled Siphila Ngokuhlanganisa which is doing well down South. Some of the tracks on the album are Bangifunemathuneni, Abantwabakho, Inhliziyo Yakho, Imithandazo yethu izeyazwakala and the title track, Siphilangokuhlanganisa. Mpofu who is different from other rhumba musicians as he does not shout his name or that of his band throughout his songs said the songs are social commentary and touch on various issues affecting people. “My main aim is to deliver messages that warn, advise and educate people. I don’t waste any time doing chants because it takes away something from what I seek to achieve. Music is a vehicle for delivering messages to people, simple,” he said. Reflecting on his over two-decade-long career, the artiste said he is glad to have worked with the likes of Chase Skuza, the late Khumbulani Moyo, Obedia Matulana, Isizukulwane and Mlambos Express Band among others. He said his passion for music developed at a young age during his days at Siganda Primary and Secondary school in Nkosikazi Village, Bubi district. “My music journey started at school as we used homemade guitars to entertain pupils. I used to do this with my brother Albert ‘Rasta’ Ndlovu and we managed to form our first band called Njivana in 1999 after we left school,” narrated Mpofu. However, Mpofu said he separated with Rasta in 2002 because of some differences. This saw him form his own band, Universe Express. -@themkhust