The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Gwanda Correspondent
MATABELELAND South province has been hit by lumpy skin disease which has resulted in the death of livestock especially cattle. Lumpy skin is a viral disease spread by mosquitoes particularly during the rainy season. Symptoms include fever, discharge from the eyes and nose, skin lesions, edema of the limbs, and swollen lymph nodes. According to the provincial Department of Veterinary Services February statistics, from 400 cattle affected by lumpy skin disease, 12 have died. Beitbridge district is reportedly the worst affected in the province. Farmers who spoke to the news crew across the province said the disease has become uncontrollable. Matabeleland South provincial officer in the Department of Veterinary Services, Dr Enart Mdlongwa yesterday said the development was caused by heavy rains experienced this season. “The lumpy skin disease is not only in Umzingwane District but across the whole province. It is normal to experience such diseases especially after receiving too much rains,” said Dr Mdlongwa. He said that most affected farmers had not vaccinated their livestock prior to the rainy season. “Farmers should have vaccinated their livestock before the rains as a prevention measure,” said Dr Mdlongwa. Umzingwane District Ward 6 councillor Amanda Khumalo said the situation has gone out of hand and livestock experts should come to the rescue of farmers. “The lumpy skin disease is a cause for concern in my area where almost every homestead has a case. I have lost one cow. We call on livestock experts to come to the rescue of farmers and give them knowledge,” said Cllr Khumalo. Mr Sifelani Dube from Tshabambeba said villagers have burnt some of the cattle that died. “A number of villagers in the area have lost the fight for their livestock against lumpy skin disease where the cattle would not be grazing for days and go on to die. “As per norm, the animal is burnt which is a great loss for many considering the state of our economy,” said Mr Dube. Ms Thithibele Ndlovu from Stanmore village in Gwanda District said, “This year lumpy skin disease hit us very hard although some of us had vaccinated around September.” -@mthabisi_mthire.