The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Gwanda Correspondent INCREASING cases of drug abuse among youths in Gwanda town has triggered a public outcry for a need to address the matter urgently. Besides mbanje, probably still the most popular illegal drug, other commonly abused drugs are crystal methamphetamine commonly known as “mutoriro”, “dombo” or “guka” plus ganja cakes, a cough syrup called BronCleer (bronco), and illicit beers known as “musombodhiya” in street lingo. In Gwanda, mbanje, bronco and mutoriro have become the common illegal drugs found on the streets. This news crew observed over the week that recreational facilities that include Gwanda High School grounds and Pelandaba stadium have turned to be meet up points for youths who want to hook up on drugs. The lungs can be damaged by any drug that is smoked, causing diseases like emphysema, lung cancer, and chronic bronchitis. Opioids depress breathing, which can worsen asthma. Many drugs can cause long-term kidney damage, including kidney failure, which is life threatening. According to the police, the illicit drugs in circulation in the country are classified into the following categories: depressants, stimulants and hallucinogens, narcotics, skin lighteners, body enlargement products and sex enhancers. Residents have called on police to intensify their drugs operations with some accusing police of protect peddlers of illegal drugs. Residents have complained to the police about dealers selling dangerous drugs to adults and children in broad day light, often not taking precautions to avoid notice. Speaking on a radio show recently, Criminal Investigations Department (CID) national spokesperson Detective Inspector Portia Chinho said bad apples have no place in the police service and appealed for information on the corrupt officers to enable the authorities to flush them out. Gwanda Residents Association deputy secretary Mr Wellington Nare said the level of drug abuse in the mining town has become a cause of concern. “As the Residents Association we are worried about the level of drug abuse in Gwanda by young people. It is a bad development for our future. “We call upon our law enforcement agents  to take stern measures against  those who are selling  these drugs to young people and refrain from protecting them,” said Mr Nare. 