The Chronicle Harare Bureau
ZIMBABWE’S men’s 4x100m relay team will be hoping for an improved show when they return to the World Relays on May 1 and 2 in Poland. The country took part in the previous edition, with a time of 38,95 seconds, at the Efika Athletics Club Championships, in Gaborone, Botswana. The performance saw the team, made up of Tatenda Tsumba, Ngoni Makusha, Dickson Kamungeremu and Itai Vambe, setting a new national record. The National Athletics Association of Zimbabwe (Naaz) has indicated they will be sending the same team for the competition, in Poland, next month. But, they are hoping to add one or two more athletes and, for now, South Africa-based Rodwell Ndlovu, is one of the athletes expected to join the team. Ndlovu was part of the team that represented the country at the Africa Senior Championships in Nigeria in 2018. Naaz president, Tendai Tagara, is hoping they can build from their experience, in the previous edition, and do even better. “We are hoping for a better performance, this time around, I think they will do better because, in 2019, it was a learning curve,”’ said Tagara.
‘”And, it was their first experience at that stage. “Everyone has been inactive, for a long time, and there is no excuse. The difference may be on training, some started early. ‘”So, we are hoping we will be strong enough to make it to the finals. “We are hoping to add one or two athletes to the team in case of injuries.”
While the national association is excited by the qualification, they are also appealing for funding, to cater for the trip. Tagara said finishing in the top eight will see them making it to the Olympics. They have engaged the Government and the Zimbabwe Olympic Committee for assistance. “Our appeal is for air tickets for, at least, five athletes and a coach. That is the minimum and, for that, we need about US$12 000. “We would love to send six to seven athletes. “We have sent our request to the Government, through the Sports Commission, and to the Zimbabwe Olympic Committee (ZOC).
“Reaching the finals, which is the top eight, means we automatically qualify for the Olympics. “Meanwhile, we are also running around for the visas, it’s a big challenge to get visas because of Covid-19. “However, our big challenge is the air tickets. We have not received a response from the Sports Commission, and the ZOC, but we are hoping for a positive response. “The little resources we have are enough to pay for food and accommodation. We have also sent an SOS to well-wishers.” The Naaz president said confirmation of their qualification came late and this made it difficult for them to engage their partners. Athletics is still chasing qualification to the Olympics and the local athletics motherbody want to take advantage of any opportunity they get.