The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma in Gwanda
ENTREPRENEURS from rural Gwanda on Monday held a mini-exhibition to showcase their products and grow their markets. The fair was held at Sengezane Primary School in Gwanda, Matabeleland South province in accordance with Covid-19 mitigation protocols. The exhibitors were drawn from horticulture, forestry, detergents production, amacimbi harvesters, fine arts, livestock and food processing. The trade fair was organised by Hand in Hand Zimbabwe, a local organisation that assists communities in creating linkages for buyers and sellers. Those who took part said the programme was important in exposing them to key markets and sharing skills to improve production.
Mrs Taboka Dlamini, a fine artiste focusing on beaded bags hopes the fair will connect her with bigger markets in the country and beyond. “I have been in this business for two years where I design handbags and other sorts of bags using beads that I buy from Bulawayo,” she said. “Business is low and I hope through this customer interaction I can evolve and come up with other styles to help me and my business to grow and reach a larger clientele base.” Six members of a group from Sengezane Village called Hungoedza, which is into jam production, said they were impressed by the attendance and hoped for more sales. “We have been out of business for a while now due to restrictions on movement and that had a blow to our finances. “As we catch up now, we hope the sales from the mini-market fair will help us to acquire more materials and start making the business flow,” said one of the members identified as MaNdlovu. Ms Celiwe Moyo, who represented a 47-member Phakamani group, said their horticulture produce and detergents were a huge source of income. “We run a detergents production company where we produce items like dishwashers. We also have a farming project where we plant vegetables and trees. “Through this expo we are confident that the association will thrive through increase of market spaces and being able to also tap into other horticulture and detergent products that are on demand,” said Ms Moyo. Mrs Esther Ncube from Kusile Cluster Investment, which is based in Garanyemba Village: “We manufacture petroleum jelly and floor polish and coming from a different village to showcase our products is a milestone”. Hand in Hand Zimbabwe Gwanda area manager, Mr Sabelo Marupe, said the mini-fair initiative was meant to empower communities through the self-sustaining projects they undertake. “There are various groups in Gwanda district as a whole that are doing great through self-sustaining projects,” he said. “This mini market fair aimed at growing the linkage of buyers and sellers and increasing the market for the village-based entrepreneurs,” said Mr Marupe. Ward 14 Councillor, Mr Phineas Maphosa, urged the exhibitors to make follow ups with their clientele and focus on attracting more business outside Gwanda. — @mthabisi_mthire