The Chronicle STOCK Exchange-listed fintech giant Cassava Smartech Zimbabwe has joined public health authorities and the Government in urging the public to exercise cautious ahead of the Easter holidays, urging the use of digital platforms to reduce the spread of Covid-19 infections. There are concerns from experts that a third wave of the deadly coronavirus may breakout if citizens let down their guard following the recent relaxation of strict lockdown provisions imposed to arrest the spread of the disease, that has caused a global pandemic. Several countries, including South Africa, Germany, Italy, the Unite Kingdom and France have tightened movements or imposed some form of restrictions, to keep citizens safe during the Easter holidays. Cassava Smartech chief commercial officer, Mr Givemore Jojo, said while the Easter weekend is an important period to spend time with family, it was critically important for citizens, where possible, to stay at home and practise social distancing and all the protective measures prescribed by health experts and the Government. “There is very much still a possibility of a third wave if we put our guards down and stop following strict safety guidelines to beat this pandemic. We, therefore, urge our customers and the public at large to exercise caution for their own sake, and for the sake of their loved ones and the nation at large,” Mr Jojo said. “We also take this opportunity to encourage the public to use digital platforms, which allow them to access services such as ZESA power tokens and many other products, from the comfort of their homes.” The Cassava group’s platforms offer several digital services across multiple sectors, that include m mobile money, banking, transport and logistics, health, farming and many others. The group also offers peer-to-peer transaction services, merchant payments, micro-credit, international remittances and card-to-wallet services. “We understand that people will want to buy groceries and other accessories that make the long weekend enjoyable, and we recently upgraded our e-commerce platform Ownai to added more products by partnering with more retailers and wholesalers,” Mr Jojo said. “Customers can simply order online, pay with EcoCash and we’ll deliver the goods right to their doorsteps through our VAYA service.” Cassava’s mobile money business EcoCash also now allows new users to register to the service without visiting any physical shops. “Unregistered customers can dial *151#, enter 1 to confirm that they want to proceed with self-registration, and then validate the information that will appear on their smartphone screens. Successful registration will be confirmed via an SMS,” Mr Jojo said. “This is all part of our digitalisation process aimed at reducing face-to-face interaction and protect both our customers and staff from contracting Covid-19.” Since its inception nearly a decade ago, EcoCash has become ubiquitous in the country and is playing a key role in fostering financial inclusion and poverty reduction by providing convenient financial solutions to the rural communities, women and the youth in Zimbabwe.