The Chronicle A NUMBER of angry clubs reportedly want the six European Super League breakaway sides to be KICKED OUT of the Premier League immediately. The football world was rocked when Manchester United and City, Liverpool, Chelsea, Arsenal and Tottenham pressed ahead with the £4,6 BILLION breakaway plan, which was confirmed last night. Premier League chiefs are furious — and several of the other 14 teams in the top-flight are allegedly wanting them to take action instantly. That is according to Sky Sports News reporter Kaveh Solhekol, who says an unnamed board member of a Prem club told him: “This is not civil war — it’s nuclear war.” He continued: “Some of the other 14 Premier League clubs who are not involved in this breakaway want the six breakaway clubs to be sanctioned immediately. “They believe the sanctions should include suspension from the current Premier League season. “So some of these other 14 clubs are so unhappy at what is happening that they want these six clubs to be kicked out of the Premier League immediately. “One club owner has said privately that he would be prepared to leave the Premier League if they had to. “So he is saying: ‘Look, the riches on offer are so great, this is the future. Even if we were to be kicked out of the Premier League we would still just focus on joining this new Super League.’” Premier League sides Arsenal, Chelsea, Liverpool, Man City, Man United and Tottenham will be joined by AC Milan, Atletico Madrid, Barcelona, Inter Milan, Juventus and Real Madrid. And three more clubs could also sign up for the inaugural season, which will commence “as soon as practicable”. Manchester United’s American owners the Glazers are at the forefront of the breakaway plans. And Solhekol added: “The owners of the clubs involved are totally committed, the breakaway is being driven by the Glazers, Ed Woodward and JP Morgan. “Several of these American owners, we are being told, still cannot understand why we have relegation in English football. “The quote that is being used is: ‘They just can’t get their heads around the concept.’” — BBC Sport