The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent South African rapper AKA has broken his silence for the first time after the suspected suicide death of his girlfriend Anele “Nellie” Tembe saying he is heartbroken as her death has taken a great toll on him emotionally and psychologically. This comes amid ongoing investigations in which AKA’s fiancée fell to her death from the penthouse on the 10th floor of the five-star Pepperclub Hotel, in the CBD of Cape Town earlier this month. In a statement released this morning, AKA said he had lost the love of his life. “I have lost the love of my life… and every day feels like a mountain to climb. I miss Anele so much and I’m heartbroken at the unfulfilled life we had planned together,” said AKA. He added that Anele’s death has taken a great toll on his life. “The tragic loss of Anele has taken a great toll on me, emotionally and psychologically.  Insinuations and innuendos made on my personhood have made it even more difficult to process and the strain our families have taken is unspeakable – which is why at this time I choose to retreat to honour my journey, praying that the moments of stillness may bring me closer to some clarity,” wrote AKA. He thanked those who have been supporting him, especially his and Anele’s family and his fans. “I wish to convey my gratitude to all the people who have supported me during this difficult time in my life, my mom Lynn and dad Tony, Bab’ Moses and Ndabezitha, my brother Steffan, my family (both Forbes and Tembe), my heartfelt gratitude to you all. To my business associates, political leaders, industry peers and elders, friends and my neighbours, thank you for rallying around me. Last but not least, to my incredibly loyal fans, the ME GACY, your collective love and support has brought me much comfort,” said AKA. Before signing off, AKA said he is going off social media as he takes time to grieve. “As we undergo this painful journey, I have entrusted my team to handle all of my affairs in the public domain, including all my social media platforms. Please respect our privacy as we go through our grieving process, and please continue to keep our families in your prayers,” said AKA.