The Chronicle Showbiz Correspondent
The dates for Culture Week commemorations in Zimbabwe have been set for May 15 to 22 and will be run virtually in light of the Covid-19 pandemic. Organised by the National Arts Council of Zimbabwe (NACZ), this year’s commemorations will be held under the theme “Resilience in safeguarding creativity and cultural diversity”. The week-long cultural fiesta will feature various online showcases including dance, music, film, theatre, visual arts, literature, poetry and comedy on platforms like Facebook, Twitter, Tik Tok, YouTube, television and radio. NACZ communication and marketing manager, Rodney Ruwende said the national launch will be held on May 15. “The theme is based on the recognition that while the creative industry has been severely affected by the global coronavirus disease (Covid-19), it has remained resilient, and therefore Culture Week provides an opportunity to celebrate and promote creativity and cultural diversity. “The national launch of Culture Week will be on the 15th of May and thereafter, events will be organised and executed at a provincial level through the NACZ structures. “NACZ has thus begun mobilising its different stakeholders and structures to prepare for this important annual event which for the second-year running, will be held virtually in line with the Covid-19 restrictions on gatherings,” said Ruwende. He said Culture Week will be celebrated in the face of Covid-19. “Culture Week is this year being celebrated to bring social cohesion and integration through the arts and culture in the face of Covid-19 and its associated lockdown measures which lead to the isolation of families and cultural practices,” said Ruwende. The concept of Culture Week was drawn from the Universal Declaration on Cultural Diversity by Unesco in 2001 which proclaimed the 21st of May as the “World Day of Cultural Diversity for Dialogue and Diversity. Zimbabwe expanded on this day to Culture Week which seeks to celebrate the world’s diverse cultures. The week provides an opportunity for Zimbabweans to flaunt their intangible and tangible cultural heritage forms that need to be preserved for posterity.