The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
Redcliff Municipality wants to engage a consultant to work on a layout and concept plan for the construction of its new town centre, which will be located along Harare-Bulawayo highway. The local authority has started construction work under its ambitious town expansion project. A mall, which houses a fuel station, fast food outlets and other services, has already been completed. Redcliff recently announced plans to expand its Central Business District (CBD) towards the Harare-Bulawayo highway as it seeks to unlock new development opportunities and become a dream city by 2030. Acting Town Clerk, Mr Nyararai Gomba, said more buildings will be constructed at the Redcliff turnoff. “We are planning to engage a consultant so that we can work on a layout plan at the turnoff for a new town centre. “We are looking forward to constructing a mega shopping mall among other major modern buildings at the turnoff,” said Mr Gomba. He said the completion of the new mall at the turn-off had enhanced visibility of the town. “The new structure has enhanced visibility of the town and shown that there are several investment prospects in the town. Several investors have expressed interest in purchasing land for development in the same area,” said Mr Gomba. He said the current CBD did not give room for expansion hence the area along the highway provided the much-needed land for expansion. “The current CBD has no room for the expansion and the plan is to develop the area close to the turnoff,” he said. Rockodox Petroleum is one of the companies to acquire land at the turnoff and has already finished construction of a mall. The company’s operations manager, Mr Michael Ndlovu, said construction of the US$500 000 service station should be completed by end of the year. “We are glad to be associated with Redcliff Town and we were the first to acquire land around the area,” said Mr Ndlovu. He said the target was to complete all construction work before the end of the year but due to Covid-19 induced travel restrictions, it was delayed. He said only a few touch-ups were left on the structure as all major works had been completed. The service station has space for grocery shops, fast foods outlets and a truckers’ inn.