The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter SIXTY players have been named in the Zimbabwe Rugby Union (ZRU) Under-20 squad that will compete in the 2021 completions. Zimbabwe rugby Under-20 coach Shaun De Souza named 29 backs and 31 forwards. The squad includes foreign-based players subject to their availability. Seven foreign-based forwards, who include Munashe Chaitezvi, Tavonga Ablant, Tawanda Matipano, Ethan Wilson, Tanaka Ndabambi and Tadiwa Murewa, who are all playing in South Africa, as well as France-based Thabani Maguranyanga. The foreign-based backs are Craig Snyder, who is in the USA, as well as Daniel Johnson, Graham Hoal, Charles Gamhiwa, Lance Annandale and Farai Madzima, who all ply their trade in South Africa. The Zimbabwe Junior Sables are scheduled to play Zambia away on May 29, with a return fixture a week later. They will then play Namibia on June 16 and June 20.  Junior Sables squad Forwards: Tomuvonga Msasanure, Runyararo Mukangure, Scotty Patson, Arthur Mambanga, Gealan Jaricha, Happias Zhou, Veshal Jasi, Marlon Guwuriro, Declan Ralphs, Tawanda Banda, Lawrence Old, Takunda Makiwa, Simbarashe Siraha, Panashe Matapure, Tanaka Gondo Mukandapi, Denzel Dhlamini, Solomon Zawe, Aaron Juma, Andrew Rinomhota, Tadiwanashe Kainga, Elvis Muroiwa, Gary Kagande, Nicholas Chipanje, Jason Makwawara Foreign based players pending availability confirmation. USA – Craig Snyder South Africa – Daniel Johnson, Graham Hoal, Charles Gamhiwa, Lance Annandale, Farai Madzima Backs: Carlos Matematema, Tinomukudza Chipfumbu, Thulani Sithole, Takudzwa Musingwini, Stephen Terera, Benjamin Pattenden, Carl Kawodza, Ryan Mutandwa, Crispen Mashingaidze, Rukudzo Ndoro, Brooklyn Chikaka, Dylan Grant, Brandan Mukundu, Paul Chadi, Liberty Sibanda, Tariro Tapfuma, Kingstone Zinyama, David Yosa, Krishna Kwenda, Brendan Mason, Cletos Sunduza, Kudakwashe Makoni, Simbarashe Kanyangarara Foreign based players pending availability confirmation. France – Thabani Maguranyanga South Africa – Munashe Chaitezvi, Tavonga Ablant, Tawanda Matipano, Ethan Wilson, Tanaka Ndabambi, Tadiwa Murewa.  Technical team: Zimbabwe Rugby U20 Head Coach : Shaun De Souza Assistant Coaches: Marvin Chirume, Constantine Dinah Manager: Hugh Vera -@ZililoR