The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
BULAWAYO Chiefs FC have accused the Footballers Union of Zimbabwe (Fuz) of “taking sides” in Perfect Chikwende’s transfer saga involving FC Platinum. The player signed for Tanzanian champions Simba SC last week, but his transfer is yet to be concluded, as Chiefs are demanding their share from FC Platinum, who reportedly sold Chikwende for a figure believed to be in the region of US$100 000. On Wednesday, Fuz wrote to Chiefs demanding that the Bulawayo side clears the player within three days. In their response, Chiefs, who have vowed to fight to the end for a “fair share”, accused Fuz of bias, saying they are not intimidated by the union. “We acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 20 January 2021. We are, however, surprised to see you arriving at a ruling without hearing from us. We feel we could have given you our input if you had asked for it, but it looks like you have taken a side already. We also disagree with you on the fact that Tatenda Perfect Chikwende is a free agent. Hence, there is no need at this time to comply with your request,” Chiefs wrote back to Fuz yesterday. Chiefs argue that FC Platinum should give them their share from the deal since Chikwende was on loan at the Zimbabwe champions. He had been loaned to FC Platinum for the 2020 soccer season, but due to the Covid-19 lockdown, Zifa issued guidelines clarifying that contracts that were due to expire in 2020 would rollover into 2021. The guidelines were taken from Fifa and Zifa spokesperson Xolisani Gwesela on Wednesday told Chronicle Sports that the guidelines adopted from Fifa on player contracts issued to its affiliates on December 31 are binding. However, in his letter to Chiefs on Wednesday, Fuz president Desmond Maringwa challenged the Zifa guidelines, adding that Chikwende will not hesitate to sue the Bulawayo side. “For the sake of good order, the Zifa letter only proposes guidelines and the content of such a letter does not constitute binding regulations. Moreover, the Zifa letter even specifically emphasises that ‘these guidelines are subject to any other mutual agreement or arrangement that parties might have agreed on’ hence even Zifa underlines that there must be an agreement between the parties. “In the present scenario, there’s no agreement between the parties, since the player is not agreeing to the loan in 2021 and his employment contract has expired. We kindly ask you to confirm in writing in the next three days that the player is free of contract with your club and that the club will cooperate with any and all requirements to transfer the player. Please note that should you not cooperate and unduly obstruct or hinder the transfer of the player, the player will not shy away from seeking damages from the club,” Maringwa wrote. — @ZililoR