The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Health Reporter THORNGROVE Infectious Diseases Hospital- one of Bulawayo’s designated Covid-19 centres yesterday received a donation of 15 beds amid reports that active cases have gone up to 430 in the city. The beds are courtesy of Zimbabwe Christian Alliance (ZCA), IAM4 BULAWAYO FIGHTING COVID-19 Trust and Mat Health organizations to fight the global pandemic which has killed 1 075 Zimbabweans. Presenting the beds to Bulawayo City Council officials sourced, ZCA representative Bishop Patson Netha said the organisation was committed to ensuring the country wins the fight against Covid-19. “The second wave of Covid 19 has been more vicious we now have lost more than 1 000 lives to the pandemic and Bulawayo has 430 active cases. As the number of infections increases, we need to urgently work on equipping the local health facilities to ensure that we have enough beds for severe cases that need admissions hence this donation of beds,” said Bishop Netha. “As Zimbabwe Christian Alliance we have been working on assistance for isolation and quarantine centres, equipping them with PPEs, mattresses, water tanks and installation of solar equipment where necessary. This donation has been made possible through the partnership that we have with the Foreign Common World and Development Office,” he said. Mat Health representative Mr Jason Siziba said the bedding was sourced from passionate Zimbabweans in the diaspora who are working hard to help public health institutions with equipment. “We have been working closely to IAM4BYO to help our people with personal protective equipment and now we have brought beds. We appreciate this trust for coordinating these donations and we are proud of its chairperson Mr Busisa Moyo who has ensured that all these donations coming through reach their intended destinations,” said Mr Siziba. Bulawayo Mayor Councillor Solomon Mguni said he was grateful for the gesture as it would save lives in Bulawayo. “Several of our departments have been affected by the harsh second wave of Covid-19 but we are grateful that we still receive donations. This donation will enable us to respond to the second wave swiftly as we all know that the numbers have become scary,” said Cllr Mguni. “As are aware this Covid has affected our service delivery in the city but we know that with support from different stakeholders we will defeat this scourge. I encourage residents to continue practicing social distancing, wearing masks and sanitising their hands to reduce new infections,” he added. @thamamoe