The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent Artistes from Bulawayo have expressed their pride for the city and made it very clear that they will remain resilient in their quest to ensure their music makes a mark through visuals of their Masiyephambili song. The visuals were released today on YouTube and are nearing 1 000 views within the first hour of release. “Asilahl’ithemba, asilahl’ithemba . . . thina singabakoBulawayo,” the artistes sing on the song. Featured artistes are Joel Nyoni, Mimie Tarukwana, Mawiza, Lady Tshawe, Cingi, Novuyo Seagirl, Vuyo Brown, Qeqeshiwe, Asaph, Taz, Njabulo Moyo, Lamas Ellz, T3rry Tempo, Killemol, Desire Moyoxide, Erastas Nleya and Mthabisi Moyo. The song that was released last month seems to be performing very well as it is currently topping charts on Eswatini-based radio station, Hala Radio. Watching the video, one is taken aback on the rise of the City of Kings and Queens since back in the days of Father Zimbabwe whose statue is only found in Bulawayo. Goosebumps become the order as the sound sequences perfectly with the Veins Media shot visuals. The video was shot at memorable locations around the city, among them, City Hall, curator market, high density suburbs flats and Tower Block. From the rhythm brought about by sensational keyboardist Prince Joel Nyoni, the artistes’ show hunger for success and assure people that they will not lose hope as they want to conquer. What makes this song unique is that is has diverse genres from Imbube, spoken word, hip hop, trap and soulful jazz among others. The track which talks about the city’s artistes love for the city also brings out the artistes unity and resilience. If the video is well marketed and gets support, it might just be the next trademark for the Soweto stands at Barbourfields stadium via the popular sheebens to the stokvel parties. Vusa Mkhaya’s publicist, Kudakwashe Takundwa said their hope is to showcase the beauty of the city through the video while also showing the artistes oneness and promoting their talent.” – @mthabisi_mthire Also commenting on the video was actor, Frank Malaba who was impressed. “Oh my! This is refreshingly beautiful! It’s truly pride instilling,” the actor commented. Click on the link to vwatch the video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8Vq06SsaUlk&lc=UgzREOHWPld1mh19X9J4AaABAg&fbclid=IwAR1qc9qXB0EzH2rxwSmmeMEKy1h-gEZGgXGhtL8SSPNSG1YxlUkPMG9cCDw 