The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
RAPPER POY says the tragic death of fellow rapper Cal Vin last year has left a vacuum in the industry which is difficult to fill. POY and Cal Vin had a healthy rivalry and like many in the industry, that Luveve boy’s death left him distraught.
The rapper who has been on a three-year hiatus, opting to take a back seat and watch the industry from a distance, marked his return recently with a new track titled Snow. The track was produced by Larynx. POY said Cal Vin left a huge void in the industry as he spoke his mind and always took a stand for his fellow artistes.
“I can’t explain how much it hurts. Vin is someone who understood our struggles as artists and expressed them in a way we’ll sadly never experience again. I’ve really been low since he died. “I know he was fighting for us and someone has to continue his fight,” said POY. Quizzed about his three-year hiatus, he said he took it because he felt uninspired. Speaking his mind through his latest track, POY said he wants to address the struggles that artistes are going through. In the track, POY reignites the debate that there is a cartel of people in the Bulawayo arts industry, some sort of arts mafia who determine which artiste blows up. On the track, POY seemingly takes a dig at a leading radio station for taking the lead in Cal Vin’s funeral but yet the station wanted to bury his career by banning his music. POY said these are some of the issues he wants to address in the new song. “The song is real hip hop that talks about real stuff that happens in our industry. The arts should be a free platform where every artiste has a free and fair chance to blow up without being castigated for their stance or views,” said POY. He said the reason the song is called Snow is because music for them is like cocaine as it is addictive. “As artists, we are all addicted to the music and we’ll do anything for it. We sacrifice anything for it, give all our money and lives for it like the way drug addicts will do anything for cocaine. Snow is the street name for cocaine. “On the flip side, the track has that rewind factor, like if you play it once, you rewind it to hear it again, it’s that addictive,” said POY. The artiste said this single is a precursor to an album, Mad Genius that is expected to hit the streets later this year.