The Chronicle Kennedy Mavhumashava, Assistant Editor
Cde Morton Malianga was among the senior leaders of the earliest nationalist parties in the country. He was there at the top as the liberation war raged and was a regular in high-profile delegations that negotiated with the British for independence. He held prominent positions in post-Independence Zimbabwe as well. Cde Malianga, born on 8 June 1930 at Old Mutare Mission in Manicaland, was deputy president in the National Democratic Party (NDP) at its formation in 1960, with Dr Joshua Nkomo the president. On November 26, 1960 The Times (UK) quoted Cde Malianga declaring that the NDP would send its own delegation to a conference, held in London, on the constitution of the Federation of Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe and Zambia) and Nyasaland (now Malawi). Black-led parties from Zambia and Malawi had been invited to the talks but the NDP, despite being the sole nationalist party in the country then had not so Cde Malianga insisted the party delegation would, “if necessary invade the conference room.” Through insistence as voiced by Cde Malianga, the NDP would later reject the constitutional proposals saying they fell too short of the key demands of the black majority. Cde Malianga was in Zapu’s first executive as secretary for public affairs at the party’s formation in 1961 after the NDP had been banned. Dr Nkomo was the president, deputised by Dr Samuel Parirenyatwa, Jason Ziyapapa Moyo as treasurer, Clement Muchachi as national organising secretary, Robert Mugabe as information and publicity secretary, Joseph Msika as secretary for youth affairs, Leopold Takawira as secretary for external and Pan-African Affairs and Jane Ngwenya as secretary for women affairs. Cde Malianga was the first secretary for youth and culture of Zanu, appointed at the first party congress in May 1964. A year later, he was arrested by the settler regime for his political activism and spent 10 years at Salisbury (now Harare) Maximum Security Prison, where he earned a Bachelor of Commerce degree. On his release in December 1974, he worked with other members in the Zanu Central Committee to advance the liberation struggle, attending talks at Victoria Falls, Geneva, Switzerland and Lancaster House in London. After Independence, he was elected to Parliament and also served as deputy in the ministries of finance, industry and commerce until 1990. At the time of his death, Cde Malianga was a member of the Zanu-PF Central Committee. Colonialrelic.com describes him as “round-faced and chubby with the self-confident demeanor of a man who knows where he wants to go.” It must be fair to say that, for a figure of his illustrious history as one of the founders of Black Nationalism in the country, Cde Malianga lived largely off the radar over the past 31 years. He lived off the limelight to the extent that for younger Zimbabweans who read books of history and black-and-white 1960s newspapers that mention him multiple times, he died a long time ago just like most of his peers. Thus, for many, it was a double shock to learn of his death on Friday. Double in the sense that he had died, and also in the sense that one of the makers of Zimbabwe’s history whom many thought died a long time ago was actually alive until Friday. He must have been a humble, selfless cadre who didn’t crave power to fit his impressive history and contribution to the liberation of the country. His contemporaries who lived well into a free Zimbabwe like him went up and up the ladder yet the highest he rose was to the position of deputy minister. That sort of humility and selflessness has to be commended. It was therefore a foregone conclusion that Cde Malianga would be declared a national hero. In his message of condolences, President Mnangagwa recognised Cde Malianga’s pioneering role in the struggle and his desire to serve the community ahead of his personal interests. “After Independence, he would continue to serve his country with honesty and integrity, including serving as a Deputy Minister of Finance under the First Republic. A long-time Member of Parliament, he put people and community first above his own personal interests, thus bequeathing a lasting moral lesson to all of us who are in leadership and who hold public office,” said President Mnangagwa. In his address at the burial of Cdes Malianga and Ellen Gwaradzimba at the National Heroes’ Acre in Harare yesterday, the President said Zimbabweans must draw lessons from the former. “The death of Cde Malianga has robbed the nation of one of the last 1960s liberation strugglers,” he said. “We must draw rich lessons from the humble character of the hero. Cde Malianga remained committed and consistent to serving the nation despite numerous arrests.” Indeed, time is taking away the people who made this country. A look at the list of names who made up the first Zapu executive suggests that after Cde Malianga’s demise, the only surviving member is probably Cde Ngwenya. In addition, it is likely that, after Cde Malianga’s death, all the leaders of the NDP, are now late.