The Chronicle NO fans — but the magic is still there. Crawley delivered the upset of the third round with a brilliant destruction of Marcelo Bielsa’s Leeds. And most embarrassingly of all for Leeds, it could have been more. It was a great day in the League Two club’s history and the obvious shame was that there were no fans inside the ground although there was an injury-time professional debut off the bench for 33-year-old reality TV star Mark Wright. Nick Tsaroulla scored a brilliant opener, Ashley Nadesan made it 2-0 three minutes later and Jordan Tunnicliffe scored to seal the tie — and there was still 20 minutes left. It was a proud moment for John Yems who, with his attacking tactics, beat Bielsa at his own game. Bielsa made seven changes from the previous game but it was still a strong team yet they were an embarrassment. Rodrigo attempted to claim a penalty but falling theatrically — and while there may have been some contact — clipped the boot of Tony Craig. Leeds keeper Kiko Casilla had little to do but kept his side level with a save before half-time. Tom Nichols had a surprisingly easy header from Jack Powell’s corner but the effort was straight at Casilla. Bielsa made three changes at the break with Jack Harrison, Jack Jenkins and Oliver Casey all being introduced and it hardly did the trick. Yet just six minutes into the second half and Tsaroulla, released by Spurs after missing a year with a car crash, produced a moment of brilliance. Tsaroulla avoided a half-hearted challenge from Pablo Hernandez, turned Jamie Shackleton inside out and breezed past Casey before drilling the ball past Casilla. Yet it got even worse for Casilla when he was beaten at his near post — the ball went through his legs — after Nadesan struck from an acute angle. Equally, you would have expected Casey to have blocked the shot. And the humiliation was complete when Jordan Tunnicliffe hammered the ball into the net after Casilla kept out the effort from Nadesan. Sub Max Watters looked set to grab a fourth after rounding Casilla but took too much time to get a shot in. But it could not take the shine off an incredible win. – BBC Sport