The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter FOLLOWING the humiliating Chan exit in Cameroon at the weekend, knives are out for Zdravko Logarusic, with angry fans calling for his immediate sacking. Things have been so poor for Loga that he has failed to register a win in six matches that he has been in charge of the Warriors in all competitions. He has managed two draws and lost four times. The Croat could only watch as his side suffered three defeats at Chan to leave the tournament pointless. The Warriors lost the opening match 1-0 against the hosts, succumbed 3-1 to Burkina Faso and 1-0 to Mali. When the Warriors scrapped a result against Algeria in the Afcon qualifiers at the National Sports Stadium last year, there was hope that perhaps there was something in Loga to improve the Warriors, but all hope appears to have been lost with the latest disaster. A majority of social media users that responded to a Twitter poll run by the Chronicle felt Loga is not the right man for the job and should face the chop. According to poll, 67 percent of the respondents felt it was noble to fire the coach immediately, while 18 percent thought they needed time to make a decision on Loga. The other 15 percent thought he will come good if given more time. One respondent Romz Chigs said: “Before I attempt to answer, how much are these warriors being paid, especially on national duty like this? It might be a matter of motivation and welfare.” Another respondent Munyaradzi Mutero wrote: “What could the coach have done when our players have been inactive for a long period. Some players are playing football without spectators.” Alvin Khumalo said the problem was that Zifa always favoured hiring foreign coaches with ‘funny’ CV’s. “We do not need to be doing that. Local coaches have done way better than these foreigners, but we never learn,” Khumalo said. Joel Maseko said after watching all three Warriors’ games, he failed to see what system or pattern they were playing. “Clearly he is not sure of what he wants to do with the team. He has made more mistakes than good. Also, we seem to have forgotten that we were sanctioned for not paying a foreign coach once, and it seems we never learn,” said Maseko. – @innocentskizoe