The Chronicle Shamiso Yikoniko AS the second wave of the coronavirus (Covid-19) hits, the world is scaling up public health responses to the pandemic and researchers are also working flat out to find lasting solutions to this novel virus. The Covid-19 pandemic brings with it the risk of significant challenges for people living with HIV (PLHIV) who need  (ART); continuum of care in the face of lockdowns and demystifying the misconceptions around PLHIV and Covid-19. Uninterrupted access to ART is the key to staying healthy and keeping the HIV virus under control so it cannot be passed on to partners. The global community is faced with an unpredictable and highly dynamic situation. The global Covid-19 death toll reaches over 2 million and confirmed cases top 96 million as of January 20, 2021. In Zimbabwe, there are over 27 890 Covid-19 confirmed cases and more than 770 deaths. Government has laid down several measures to try and curb the spread of the virus, but what does Covid-19 mean for PLHIV? UNAIDS maintains that there is currently no clear evidence that PLHIV are at an increased risk of acquiring Covid-19 or of becoming more ill from it. However, many PLHIV are ageing and/or have other health conditions, including heart disease or lung disease, that are known to make people susceptible to more severe Covid-19 disease. Although the risk of serious illness from Covid-19 for PLHIV is not known, PLHIV may have concerns and questions related to their risk. The Centre for Disease Control (CDC) answers some of them; Are PLHIV at higher risk for Covid-19 than other people? At the present time, the evidence on the impact of Covid-19 among PLHIV is still scarce. CDC continues to monitor the science and will communicate important advances. The risk from immune suppression is not known, but with other viral respiratory infections, the risk for PLHIV getting very sick is greatest in: people with a low CD4 cell count, and people not on HIV treatment (antiretroviral therapy or ART). PLHIV can also be at increased risk of getting very sick with Covid-19 based on their age and other medical conditions. What can PLHIV do to protect themselves from Covid-19? PLHIV should take everyday preventive actions to help prevent the spread of Covid-19. PLHIV should also continue to maintain a healthy lifestyle. This includes eating right, getting at least 8 hours of sleep, and reducing stress as much as possible. Staying healthy helps your immune system fight off infection should it occur. If you have HIV and are taking your HIV medicine, it is important to continue your treatment and follow the advice of your health care provider. This is the best way to keep your immune system healthy. Remember to wear your mask appropriately, wash your hands and continuously socially-distance. What should I do if I think I might have Covid-19? Call your health care provider if you develop symptoms that could be consistent with Covid-19. Discuss how to get evaluated and how to avoid potentially exposing others to Covid-19. Alternatively, you are advised to call the following Ministry of Health and Child Care TOLL FREE HOTLINE numbers for assistance, 2019. What else can PLHIV who are at higher risk of getting very sick from Covid-19 do to protect themselves? PLHIV also have higher rates of certain underlying health conditions. Both increased age and these conditions can increase their risk for more severe illness if PLHIV get Covid-19, especially people with advanced HIV. Steps that PLHIV can take to prepare in addition to what is recommended for everybody: Make sure you have at least a 3-6 months’ supply of your HIV medicine and any other medications or medical supplies you need for managing HIV. Make sure you can maintain a social network remotely, such as online or by phone. This can help you stay socially connected and mentally healthy, which is especially important for PLHIV. PLHIV can sometimes be more likely than others to need extra help, from friends, family, neighbours, community health workers, and others. If you become sick make sure you stay in touch with people who can help you. With the Covid-19 pandemic, the response must not be fear and stigma. CDC is garnering for the need to build a culture of solidarity, trust and kindness. “Our response to Covid-19 must be grounded in the realities of people’s lives and focused on eliminating the barriers people face in being able to protect themselves and their communities,” maintains CDC. Countries are being urged to take decisive action to control the epidemic and provide necessary services and diagnostics to the people who need them, whether living with HIV or not. For feedback, kindly email yikonikos@zach.org.zw