The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
GOVERNMENT says it has noted with concern several budgetary irregularities in local authorities which could result in several councils losing part of the $19,5 billion devolution funds. Treasury allocated $19,5 billion in 2021 national budget for implementation of devolution projects by local authorities. In a statement yesterday, Local Government and Public Works Minister July Moyo said while the Government approved 52 of the 92 budgets for local authorities for this year, some of the books were in shambles and needed attention. Minister Moyo said of the 40 outstanding local authorities’ budgets, 14 including Hwange Local Board are yet to submit their budgets while 24 submitted their budgets at the beginning of the year. He said some of the councils risk being penalised for perennially violating Public Finance Management Act (Chapter 22:19) due to delays in submitting their budgets. The Minister expressed concern that Kusile Rural District Council (RDC) and Umguza RDC both in Matabeleland North failed to properly budget and would have to redo their accounts with assistance from the Ministry. “Of the originally submitted budgets, two were referred back due to lack of compliance with either audit and proper budget requirements and these are Kusile RDC and Umguza RDC. A team of officials from the ministry is going to be dispatched to assist the two local authorities that are encountering challenges in the budgeting process,” said the Minister. He said some councils did not budget for devolution projects and as such the Government cannot allocate them funds that are important for the provision of social services. “The Ministry has also noted that there are local authorities that are not complying with the Devolution Circular and have not budgeted for devolution funds in their annual budgets. Those who do not submit devolution budgets for approval will not receive devolution funding. In utilising devolution funds, each council should, therefore, pay attention to projects and programmes that have a high impact on the livelihoods of the local community and populace taking into consideration the three variables which are; population, poverty levels and infrastructure development,” he said. “Each local authority must prioritise the most vulnerable communities. Focus must therefore be on the following areas: education, health, water, sanitation and hygiene, electricity, roads and amenities in order to reduce walking distances to access services. Urban local authorities, need focus on water, sanitation and hygiene to reduce incidences of outbreaks of waterborne diseases such as cholera and typhoid.” Minister Moyo said the Government’s increase in budgetary allocation for devolution projects should result in councils increasing capital and infrastructural development projects. He urged the councils to employ competent staff with technical skills to implement devolution projects. Minister Moyo said local authorities should establish estate accounts ensuring that land is only sold within the confines of the law and those found to be violating the law will be dealt with accordingly. “Unaudited accounts, budget lagging behind for more than a year like those of Harare and Gweru councils will need assistance to correct this situation which is a violation of the statutes,” said Minister Moyo. He said the Government through the offices of Ministers of State for Provincial Affairs and Devolution, Provincial Development Coordinator and District Development Coordinator will monitor the implementation of approved budgets. — @nqotshili