The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
ARMED with the belief that he has gained enough experience over the years, 52-year-old Mgcini Mafu has announced his candidature for the Highlanders’ executive committee member. Mafu was part of the first ever officially recognised Highlanders Supporters Chapter that was chaired by the late Bekezela Maduma Fuzwayo in Hwange. The chapter also had the late Lovemore Ncube as its treasurer. They did a lot of work for the club, including providing lunch for the first team every time it played against Hwange at the Colliery Stadium. The chapter also held numerous fund raising activities in and around Hwange such as selling club replica shirts as well as organising and hosting the Miss Highlanders-Hwange beauty pageant. When he returned to his hometown of Bulawayo, Mafu continued being actively involved in Highlanders’ issues, albeit behind the scenes. “I will not bore members by coming up with outrageous promises of things that I will do. A committee member’s duties are clearly defined in the constitution and when someone promises you other things, then people must know that those are fake promises,” says Mafu. He says if elected, he will work flat out to push the membership drive, not only in Bulawayo, but other areas outside the city as well. “As a committee member, I don’t believe in travelling on the team bus everytime while sleeping in hotels with the team; no that is not my way of doing things. A committee member must be part of an advance party where he will get a chance to mobilise supporters say on the eve of the match, encourage them to become members, while hearing their concerns. But if you arrive, say in Ngezi, on the day of the match, when will you meet the supporters? Once in office I will make that my priority to get as many people as possible into becoming members where they also get to have a say in the administration of their club,” said Mafu. Mafu will square off against Bheka Sibanda, who has previously financially assisted the club, especially the juniors.