The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
HIGHLANDERS’ chairmanship aspirant Johnfat Sibanda says the only way the club can retain dominance in the Premier Soccer League is through adopting a culture of having long-term contractual agreements with players. Sibanda, a first timer in contesting Bosso’s power matrix, enters the race for the top seat against incumbent Kenneth Mhlophe. So far, the two are the only ones that have publicly announced interest in landing Bosso’s top post. With the catchphrase “The Giant Awakens, together we are one”, Sibanda on Tuesday unveiled his campaign strategy to bonafide Highlanders’ members that are set to vote in the elections pencilled for February 7. Sibanda says if elected, he will tie down players and technical staff. “The junior academy must be able to provide a foundation where the senior team can harvest talent from,” said Sibanda. He said the club should retain and reward junior coaching staff for continuity and provide adequate training equipment and facilities to enhance player development. “We will also develop and maintain a self-contained and well-supported junior policy,” said Sibanda. He also promises to commercialise the institution through a number of initiatives, which include turning around the club house’s fortunes, which he believes are being highly underutilised. The businessman, with interests in farming, said he will repossess other money-spinning entities like the kitchen and Hlabangana, which are being leased. “My vision is to promote and maintain Highlanders Football Club as a cohesively united democratic entity of world-class standards through collaborative engagement with its members, supporters and the business community, to jealously uphold and enforce the club’s constitutional provisions through integrity, transparency, responsiveness and efficacy. “I want to turn Highlanders FC into a national and global financial giant through professional and qualitative management of its commercial entities and resuscitating the revenue potential of its junior policy, to overwhelmingly thrive to promote a united Highlanders’ executive and board member and encourage the enforcement of a collective and collusive work ethic towards achieving the ideals and aspirations of the club,” said Sibanda in his three-page manifesto. Sibanda said signing players on long-term is hinged on his belief that Highlanders must remain a club of choice and a formidable side that will conquer in both local and continental inter-club competitions. Women’s football promotion is also one of the highlights of his campaign. “We will revive and support other sporting disciplines in the Highlanders’ family through funding women’s football, netball, volleyball and netball. “We will also strengthen and support the establishment of Highlanders supporters’ chapters throughout the country and abroad and constantly engage and liaise with supporters’ chapters on developmental matters relating to the club,” he said. – @innocentskizoe