The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
DISMEMBERED body parts believed to be that of a 40-year-old Harare man who fell into a gorge at the Victoria Falls Rainforest on New Year’s Day have been found trapped at the Danger Point. Zimbabwe National Parks and Wildlife Authority (Zimparks) spokesperson Mr Tinashe Farawo confirmed that the body parts believed to be that of Mr Roy Dikinya who fell into the gorge had been found. He said Mr Dikinya slipped and fell from one of the viewing points of the Victoria Falls. Mr Farawo said the body parts are trapped between the rocks down the gorge. “Since Friday when the tragedy occurred, we have been searching for him, and our search teams in collaboration with police managed to locate his body yesterday (Saturday) late afternoon.” “We haven’t been able to positively identify him because of the location where the body is trapped, but we are certain that it his body,” he said. Mr Farawo said Zimparks, the police and other tour operators were engaging other security personnel to assist in retrieving the body. “The body parts were spotted about 100 metres down and are trapped between rocks. Right now we are in communication with other security experts including the army to try and find ways of retrieving the body,” he said. Mr Farawo, however, said entry to the Victoria Falls has not been interrupted by the incident. “While we are conducting our search, it still remains business as usual for our tourists,” he said. Shearwater Adventures public relations manager Mr Clement Mukwasi said his company is part of the search and rescue team through the use of their jet boat and rafters. “The remains of the tourist who fell at the Danger Point have not been retrieved yet. We are assisting Zimparks and the police to retrieve it. We hear that his body is trapped between rocks,” he said. Meanwhile, an unidentified body of a male adult has been located floating down the gorges around rapid number 8 down the Victoria Falls. Police investigations are underway to identify the second body. “There is a second body that rafters have seen floating around rapid 8. Details of the origin and nationality of the second body are yet to established,” said Mr Mukwasi. The two accidents happened at a time when the Victoria Falls has received increased water inflows from the Zambezi River owing to heavy rains being received in the region.