The Chronicle LONDON (AFP) — Manchester City kick off the New Year at Chelsea on Sunday, eager to move on from a recent Covid-19 outbreak and get back to putting pressure on English Premier League football leaders Liverpool. The match, cast into question when Covid-19 forced City to close facilities and postpone Monday’s game at Everton, is set to go ahead after the visitors returned to training on Wednesday. Surging infections in London and the postponement on Wednesday of Tottenham Hotspur’s match at Fulham, Chelsea’s West London neighbours, raised doubts but the English Premier League is confident fixtures can go ahead. “Safety remains our number one priority, and the club will continue to proceed with great caution,” City said in a statement. “The bubble will undergo further testing in the coming days, the results of which will inform and dictate the next steps.” On the pitch, eighth-placed City will be chasing a third successive league win while Chelsea need to turn around a run of poor form that includes three defeats and a draw in their last five games. “At the moment, they are a crisis club because they are under-performing,” former Chelsea striker Chris Sutton told BBC radio after the West Londoners drew 1-1 with Aston Villa and slipped to sixth. “They are flat and that’s why (manager) Frank (Lampard) needs to get a few wins under his belt and extremely quickly because it can, as we know, turn ugly at Chelsea.” Champions Liverpool, on 33 points from 16 matches, drew 0-0 with Newcastle United on Wednesday and travel to Southampton on Monday. The points difference between City and Liverpool is seven points but City have two games in hand. Manchester United, second in the standings and on a nine-match unbeaten streak, host fifth-placed Aston Villa tonight. Ole Gunnar Solskjaer’s side are three points behind Liverpool. Leeds United, fresh from a 5-0 thrashing of West Bromwich Albion on Tuesday, travel to Tottenham Hotspur for tomorrow’s lunchtime kick-off while high-flying Leicester City are at Newcastle United on Sunday. Everton host West Ham United today and Arsenal play at West Brom tomorrow. Sheffield United, with two points from 16 Premier League games, travel to Crystal Palace, who are on a five-game winless run, tomorrow. Meanwhile, the English Premier League says it has no plans to suspend the season despite a rise in positive coronavirus tests. On Tuesday, the latest round of top-flight testing found 18 people had the virus. New coronavirus cases at Fulham led to their Premier League match at Tottenham on Wednesday being called off.
West Brom manager Sam Allardyce has called for a football “circuit break” but the Premier League says it “has not discussed pausing the season”. “The league continues to have confidence in its Covid-19 protocols to enable fixtures to be played as scheduled, and these protocols continue to have the full backing of government,” it said. “With the health of players and staff the priority, the league is also fully supportive of how clubs are implementing the protocols and rules.” On Monday, Manchester City’s Premier League match at Everton was postponed four hours before kick-off because of a coronavirus outbreak. Sheffield United have confirmed they had “numerous positive tests” in the latest round of testing. Although the Premier League is to continue as planned, fans will once again be banned from attending football matches as more areas of England are to be placed under tougher coronavirus restrictions from midnight. Liverpool is to be moved into tier three of the government’s restrictions for England, which means fans will no longer be allowed into Anfield or Everton’s Goodison Park. The two grounds had been the only Premier League stadiums permitted to allow up to 2 000 fans inside under tier two restrictions. Many other areas of England, including parts of the North West, the North East and the Midlands moved into the toughest tier four restrictions yesterday. English Premiership Fixtures Today: Everton v West Ham United (7:30pm); Manchester United v Aston Villa (10pm). Tomorrow: Tottenham Hotspur v Leeds United (2:30pm); Crystal Palace v Sheffield United (5pm); Brighton & Hove Albion v Wolverhampton Wanderers (7:30pm); West Bromwich Albion v Arsenal (10pm). Sunday: Burnley v Fulham (2pm); Newcastle United v Leicester City (4:15pm); Chelsea v Manchester City (6:30pm).
Monday: Southampton v Liverpool (10pm).