The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Acting Business Editor
CHEMICALS manufacturing concern, Chemical Technology Africa will soon install a new plant that produces 20 000 litres of sanitisers and detergents a day to consolidate the firm’s contribution to the fight against Covid-19. The factory which is in the Belmont Industrial area in Bulawayo, is producing 10 000 litres a day. Speaking by telephone, the company’s operations manager Mr Liberty Nyathi said the new production plant which was being procured from China, is expected in the country by March. “We have bought a new production plant from China that we are expecting next month or in March. “The plant costs about US$25 000 including landing cost, and we are left with less than 40 percent of the total cost, which balance we are in the process of clearing,” he said. The company manufactures sanitisers and detergents such as liquid soap, liquid hand wash, bleach and degreaser for domestic and industrial use. Their latest technology, Mr Nyathi said, has four compartments which are the water treatment plant, production vessels, filling plant and the capping plant. Mr Nyathi said the hand sanitisers his company is producing have 70 percent alcohol content. “Our sanitisers have 70 percent alcohol content, which is above the prescribed minimum of 60 percent,” he said. The World Health Organisation stipulates that hand sanitiser should be produced with an alcohol content of between 60 and 90 percent for it to kill viruses and bacteria. The Government recently expressed concern over the influx of sub-standard hand sanitisers on the market urging the public to shun such products. “Apart from supplying our detergents and sanitisers with a brand name ‘sanite’, we also supply our market which largely covers the southern region of the country with latex gloves, face masks, face shields, theatre caps, disposable aprons and many other Personal Protective Equipment to fight Covid-19,” said Mr Nyathi. In line with the Government’s import substitution thrust to save foreign currency and promote viability of local industry, Mr Nyathi said his organisation sources raw materials locally. “We are sourcing raw materials locally and this has enabled us to improve on our operational efficiencies while ensuring sustainable and adequate supplies of our products on the market,” he said. — @okazunga