The Chronicle Showbiz Reporter
“In any journey, the most important step is always the first one”. This rings true for comedian, Carl Joshua Ncube and wife Nelsy who have embarked on a mission to build their dream home in the rural areas. The project that they have termed Ekaya, also seeks to promote rural tourism while also empowering the rural folks. The couple’s ultimate goal is to build their dream home which they believe will give the world a taste of rural Africa. In 2019, the couple got fed up of paying rent at lodgings where they rarely stayed in Victoria Falls since they were forever on the go and so, they decided to move into a tent. After some time staying in the tent which they designed in a comfortable way, they discovered it was possible to live in alternative accommodation and since then they have never looked back. Now, they have shifted from Victoria Falls and relocated to a rural settlement on the outskirts of the city in pursuit of the Ekaya tourism idea. Within a few weeks, they have already made a lot of progress on their piece of land that has left many admiring them. Still residing in their bus that they converted into a home, the two are now focused on making the bus more comfortable while constructing their dream rural hut. They have put fancy flower beds in front of the bus and also made a makeshift outdoor shower. This couple has somehow made all that they touch become so cool, from residing in a tent to a bus and now constructing a fancy hut in the rural area. According to Carl, after the construction of the rural home, the next plan is for them to move to a farm home. Due to poor network connectivity at the new base, updates of the progress they are making is being shared every Monday on Carl’s social media pages so people can follow the journey there and get inspired. A YouTube account where Carl is sharing videos has also been setup. Impressed by the steps that Carl and Nelsy have been taking, musician Alexio Kawara said it is key that people take notes from the couple. “From you (Carl) and Nelsy, I’m learning to complain less and act more. Fear of the future is just what it is, fear of the future. It stops us from acting on the now. I respect you for this. May this story be an inspiration to a lot of us so we move on together as a people,” posted the Shaina hit-maker.