The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Gwanda Correspondent
Gwanda has an up-and-coming rapper, Zagoe Radge who hip hop fans should look out for as he is slowly turning to be a contender for the mining town’s rap king status. His powerful and educative lyrical power earned him recognition last year when he won The Eminent in Sports, Music and Academic Awards (Tesma) Best hip hop song award for his song Lotto. Saturday Leisure caught up with the artiste, (real name Isaiah Richard) who said he feels it is time he popularises his brand. The musician who is under the reputable X-Studios music label said:
“I started doing music at a tender age and this passion has seen me grow to become a household name. “I’m a hip-hop trap musician on the rise who offers vibrant, free flowing music that’s all about changing people’s lives in a soulful, entertaining way. “I recorded my first professional work in 2017 and I’m now on a mission to create a brand of my own in the music industry.” Zagoe Radge said he has started working on his second album, a project titled Malambane which has 14 tracks. He expects it to be out sometime this year. The album is a follow up to his debut 2017 offering, Judgement that had six tracks. Amalambane has tracks that were produced by DJ Drumz and Kuda Kay. These are Lotto, Not Enough, Ang’soke Ngakhathala, Qudhe ft KhoiKhoi, Call Me, Some Love, Ama2K ft DJ Drumz, Uzongkhumbula, Arolina ft Tinnel, Emakhaya, Fake Luv, Amademon ft Zhezhingtonz and Shallar and Bayasizonda ft Ronnie B. Zagoe Radge’s songs mainly focus on social life issues, love and unity with his biggest dream being to one day have his own record label and recording studio. “My dream is to have my own music stable to groom young and up-and-coming artistes in the hip hop trap genre as I feel I’ve the ability to do so,” he said. The artiste who has shared the stage with artistes, Jah Signal, Madlela Skhobokhobo, Bazooka and Gwanda-based artistes such as GDA Fire, Zhezhingtonz, Skollah and Bry among others urged the corporate world to support local talent in order to develop the arts industry. “The year 2020 was not a good one for the arts industry as our works and operations were blown away by the Covid-19 pandemic. It’s the same this year hence I’m urging the corporate world to support us as they’re our only hope since we don’t have any source of income.” — @mthabisi_mthire