The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
HWANGE born Ndebele rap artiste Junior Garnet Target is set to perform for 10 different people each week during interactive shows he has lined up, to connect intimately with his fans. Partnering award winning online media Fokus Magazine, who will provide the platform for the live stream of the shows, the innovative gig is meant to adapt to the Covid-19 pandemic health measures that ban gatherings. The improvised show is expected to start once the arts sector is given the green light to operate and this will see the musician hold a gig dubbed 10 seats. The 10 seats initiative will see Garnet, who is a StarBrite Season 8 Semi Finalist, host a show that will only physically have a 10-member audience with the rest of the proceedings to be aired virtually. Commenting on the development, Garnet said the idea behind the fete is to create a sociable audience that mingles well with his work. “Once the lockdown is eased I will be introducing a series of events called 10 Seats. The event will be held every week at a secret venue where I will be performing for 10 different people with a live band. “I chose a small number for the audience because I want the event to be as interactive as possible and I want to have a relationship with the audience,” he said. Garnet said with such shows he will be able to create lasting relationships with his fans as they are the roots of his career. The series of performances will involve a band namely Ordain Ngwenya (keyboard player) and Paul Reilo (guitarist) with guest artistes expected to be popping through here and there. “I want to interact with the audience because I want to grow as an artiste using the feedback that the audience gives me after the performance. “Also, I made it less people because gatherings are being limited in this pandemic era,” said Garnet. Founder and Chief Content Officer of Fokus Magazine Sindiso Dube said up and coming artistes need to be innovative in order for them to bloom during such a devastating time for the arts sector. “We are excited to be part of Garnet’s project. It’s quite an interesting approach to his music. His intention is to find an intimate space with fans and get to know what fans want and expect from him. “This is a smart bi-directional way of approaching his market and we know it will pay back in the long run thus upcoming artistes should take a leaf of such. It’s high time young creatives start to collaborate as with that they have more power,” said the reigning Bulawayo Arts Awards Outstanding online media and NAMA 2017 nominee.- @mthabisi_mthire