The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Showbiz Reporter What is in a name? Perhaps this question is answered well by Rhumba outfit, Private Boys who have been doing exactly what their name suggests, remaining private despite producing music. It is only now that the group has finally decided to come out and market their rhumba music. Led by Cephas Ncube who hails from Madabe area in Mangwe district, the band recently released their fourth album.
Explaining their name, Ncube said: “The better part of our music journey was spent underground. We taught ourselves to play guitars outside the glare of the public and no one knew what we were up to. So when we started releasing music, we took people by surprise. “When they discovered what we were up to, they said we were very secretive and that’s what gave birth to the name.” Being underground, Ncube said, may not have been their choice but was as a result of lack of knowledge as to how best to promote their music. “We’re largely unknown because truly speaking, we were blank as to how we could promote our music. It’s taken us long to learn the ropes as we were concentrating on doing music not knowing that too much work awaits in terms of marketing it,” he said. Ncube said they have been relying on selling their music to those who knew them and would have placed orders but now they are ready to go public and market their brand to new markets. The group is ready to get out of their comfort zone and to show their seriousness, they have sought the services of Rhumba star Mxolisi “Mr Bones” Ndlovu and Quiet Gambule who did backing vocals and featured on two songs on their latest offering. “Our first album in 2016 was titled Step Mother. In 2017, we recorded Iqiniso Ngemva kobuNgozi while in 2018, we produced Kuyoqala Bani. Now, we’ve just released UMqali Wendaba where we featured Mxolisi Mr Bones Ndlovu and another Rhumba artist, Quiet Nkambule to try and help us break new ground,” Ncube said. The latest album which is a social commentary, contains tracks, Umoya wami ubuhlungu, Bantwabami, Umuntu wakho, Batshiyene and Balandeli Bethu. “We’re making arrangements to have the album sent to all the radio stations as we’ve been starving people of our music and want to fix this. Now is the time to also join the league of other bands and be competitive. “We are also creating distribution channels for our albums so that the public has access to all our music.” Ncube who is the lead vocalist and bass guitar player, said they are partnering Tapfuma Nyathi for their next project. -@themkhust