The Chronicle Melissa Mpofu
EMIRATES, which has recorded a gradual increase in travel on the Dubai-Harare-Lusaka route is set to increase flights to these destinations to four times a week starting early next month. After a six-month closure of international passenger flights due to the Covid-19 lockdown last year, Emirates resumed flights to the country in October with three weekly flights. Now, due to the viability of the route, the airline, one of the world’s largest, said it will operate its fourth flight on Wednesdays, using a Boeing 777-300ER aircraft, complementing its current Friday, Saturday and Sunday flights on the route. “Emirates’ flight EK714 departs Harare at 1255hrs on Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays and Wednesdays, arriving in Dubai at 0035hrs the next day. “Flight EK713 departs from Dubai at 0330hrs on Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays and Wednesdays, arriving in Harare at 1115hrs,” said the airline. It said passengers from Harare can also travel to Lusaka on the same flight, arriving in Lusaka at 1400hrs, and departing from Lusaka at 1010hrs. According to the Dubai-based airline, since resuming flights to the country last year, it has seen a gradual increase in travel demand. Emirates said the expanded schedule of services is set to offer better connectivity for customers in Zimbabwe and Zambia to Emirates’ growing destination network of more than 100 destinations. The airline connects business and leisure travellers from Zimbabwe to the Middle East, Europe, the Far East, the Americas, Australasia and West Asia. In light of the Covid-19 pandemic that continues to cause chaos across the globe where a second wave is being experienced, travellers using the airline can travel with confidence as they will receive free Covid-19 medical cover should they be diagnosed with the virus during travel. “Travellers from Zimbabwe can now travel with confidence thanks to the free cover on Covid-19 related medical expenses should they be diagnosed with Covid-19 during their travel while they are away from home. “This cover is immediately effective for Emirates customers flying with tickets purchased between 1 December, 2020 and 31 January, 2021 and is valid for 31 days from the moment they fly the first sector of their journey,” said Emirates. The airline said this means its customers can continue to benefit from the added assurance of the medical cover, even if they travel onwards to another city after arriving at their Emirates destination. “The free, global cover for Covid-19 related costs is further complemented by the comprehensive set of measures that Emirates has put in place at every step of the customer journey to ensure the safety of its customers and employees on the ground and in the air, including the distribution of complimentary hygiene kits containing masks, gloves, hand sanitiser and antibacterial wipes to all customers,” said the airline Meanwhile, tourists intending to travel to Zimbabwe are welcome to do so as international air travel is still permitted with bars, restaurants and hotels that serve them fully operational for their convenience.