The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Following the recent tightening of lockdown regulations most producers and artistes in Gwanda now appreciate the importance of embracing virtual shows. After successful staging of virtual shows by various stables and artistes across the country last year, most artistes are now aware that for them to attract virtual audiences, they have to package their content well. Gwanda’s top music stable, X-Studios which houses several artistes, among them, the co-owner Master Zhoe, DJ Drumz, Dagger, Cutie G, Skollah and Jay Dee is in the process of sourcing state-of-the-art musical equipment for use during the virtual shows so that it is able to produce high quality productions. During live shows, most artistes in the town have been using DJs for their performances and as such were not giving audiences a live feel as they have been using backtracks. This somewhat compromises their quality and to improve this, X Studios is mobilising a live band for use by artistes during their virtual shows. Chronicle Showbiz recently visited the stable’s well-equipped studio that is in Spitzkop suburb. The studio has equipment that includes a flat screen television, two desktop machines, four studio speakers and studio mic. In an interview at the studio, Master Zhoe said they have started to buy equipment which will be used at the studio and during live shows. “As a music stable, we’ve been hit hard by the lockdown, but we’ve taken this as an opportunity to source equipment and a band which will be used for live shows. So far, we’ve managed to get equipment that includes a 12-channel mixer, one bass guitar, one auxiliary keyboard, one box guitar and one rhyme guitar. “We’re now in the process of buying another keyboard piano, more guitars and drums. We want to revamp our studio as we want to change the town’s music scene,” Master Zhoe said. He said revamping the studio and the use of a live band will benefit the Matabeleland South province at large as the use of most of these things will be free of charge. “The studio is focused on empowering artistes in the province hence is offering free recording and mastering sessions. The in-house band that we’re mobilising will also be at the disposal of artistes,” said Master Zhoe. – @mthabisi_mthire.