The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
FOR the rural community in Mawane village, down south of Gwanda, it’s very odd to see a musician, let alone a hip hop one, emerge. Defying the odds is up-and-coming rapper Talent Ncube who uses the stage name Tylane Sigh as he is growing in the industry with five solo singles and eight from a hip hop crew named Clean B that he formed in 2018 when he relocated to Bulawayo. Narrating his journey which became professional three years ago, Tylane Sigh said: “Growing up, I loved music, be it pop or hip hop. For us rural boys, it was sort of taboo to be into hip hop and not be a fan of tshibilika and rhumba music. Some labelled me a cheese boy and I simply couldn’t be bothered. “The more they labelled me, the more they pushed me to the hip hop genre as I found it cool. I then started doing music professionally in 2018 and formed a gang of three called Clean B. By then, we were into pop before we got into hip hop.” “My inspiration came from the likes of Lil Wayne, 2pac, G-eazy, T.I and South African rapper Nasty C.” Tylane Sigh said through his stint with Clean B, he managed to find himself and came up with a sound that was exclusive to him. “I managed to come up with a different sound in the industry, especially here in Bulawayo where I’m now based. From there, I went solo and up to date, I have five singles – Hommies in my hood, Dough, Level up, Amalobolo ft HBA and Over the moon.” The artiste who has vowed not to let the lockdown derail him said he is working on his debut album which he hopes to release in March. “I’m hoping to complete my debut album that’ll consist of 12 songs. It’ll be titled League of Legends. So far, five tracks – God’s will, Cicatrix, Black Street, Mission impossible and Over the moon have been recorded. “Featuring on the album are other up-and-coming artistes like Bulkman and I’m working with Cliff Jeans as my producer, Obiq from Gwanda and BMC,” said Tylane Sigh. The artiste said the album is meant to narrate his journey in the music industry and its teachings. “I’ve been underground for a quite long time and I feel that now is the time to come out of my shell, something that I speak about in my album,” said the 23-year-old rapper. – @mthabisi_mthire.