The Chronicle MANCHESTER UNITED held onto top spot in the Premier League after grinding out a dour 0-0 draw at title rivals Liverpool, while Tanguy Ndombele’s stunning strike sealed Tottenham’s 3-1 win at Sheffield United yesterday. Ole Gunnar Solskjaer’s side had the better chances in a strangely subdued clash between two of English football’s bitterest rivals. Liverpool goalkeeper Alisson Becker saved well from Bruno Fernandes and Paul Pogba in the second half, but neither side deserved to win. United are three points clear of third placed Liverpool and two ahead of second placed Leicester. United are top after the New Year for the first time since Alex Ferguson’s retirement in 2013 thanks to nine wins in an 12-match unbeaten run. Leaving Anfield unscathed is a solid result for United as they chase a first title in eight years, but they might feel it was a missed opportunity to pile pressure on injury-hit Liverpool given their recent struggles. It is the first time these two old foes have been involved in a title race together since 2009 when United, then at their peak, held off Liverpool’s challenge. But there was little feel of a seismic encounter as both teams largely played with the handbrake on at an empty and silent Anfield. Liverpool are well short of the dynamic form that carried them to the title last season and the Champions League in 2019. Jurgen Klopp’s team have now gone four league games without a win and are without a goal in their last three top-flight matches. Liverpool defender Joel Matip wasn’t fit enough to feature, so Jordan Henderson had to play as a makeshift centre-back alongside fellow midfielder Fabinho. Despite that setback, Liverpool dominated a cautious first half with over 65 per cent of the possession. They lacked a cutting edge in the final third and Roberto Firmino shot wide before Mohamed Salah volleyed over. It took United 34 minutes to have a shot and they almost took the lead from it as Bruno Fernandes whipped his free-kick inches wide. In an equally scrappy second half, Fernandes forced a good save from Alisson when his effort from Luke Shaw’s cross was turned away by the Brazilian’s foot. Thiago Alcantara’s strike was well saved by David De Gea, while Alisson made another fine stop to deny Paul Pogba’s close-range shot. At Bramall Lane, Tottenham took an early lead through a rare goal from Ivory Coast defender Serge Aurier. Harry Kane’s 19th goal of the season – the England captain’s fourth in his last six games – increased Tottenham’s advantage before halftime. David McGoldrick got one back for bottom of the table United in the second half, but Ndombele’s sublime lob, flicked over his shoulder from an acute angle, wrapped up the points. The wonder-goal was the latest sign of Ndombele turning his Tottenham career around. The 24-year-old’s fine form is a stark contrast to his struggles in his first season after arriving from Lyon, with Mourinho admitting the player had to change his mindset to get back on track. “He is incredible. For me sometimes you can score a great goal isolated from your performance. In this case the goal confirmed his performance. It was really, really good,” Tottenham manager Jose Mourinho said. Fourth placed Tottenham are on a seven-match unbeaten run in all competitions after winning at Bramall Lane for the first time since 1975. Manchester City hosted Crystal Palace in yesterday’s late match. — SuperSport