The Chronicle Midlands Bureau Chief
Heart of a Woman Trust has appointment Ms Vimbai Chingwaramusee as its new board chairperson. A journalist by training, Ms Chingwaramusee, a former News and Current Affairs anchor at Gweru radio station 98.4FM, is the Gweru City Council’s public relations officer. The Trust was founded in 2014 by a group of passionate Zimbabwean citizens working to address the needs of marginalised groups in society and promote gender equality. “It is with pleasure that we announce the appointment of Vimbai Chingwaramusee as the board chairperson of Heart of a Woman Trust, effective 1 February 2021,” said Ms Verna Zisengwe, the director of the Trust. Ms Zesengwe said the Trust’s main thrust was to assist women prisoners so that they live better lives when they leave prison. “We seek to address the women’s plight during incarceration through to release from prison and life beyond bars. Our aim is to re-ignite the flame in them after release from prison. We empower and prepare them for effective re-integration into society by sponsoring income generating projects. We believe they deserve another chance in life and can make a difference in the society,” she said. Ms Zisengwe said Ms Chingwaramusee strongly believes in women emancipation and she supports the academic lives of women in all spheres. She said her flair in public relations and notable interpersonal skills will bolster the Trust’s cause. “With Vimbai on the board of Heart of a Woman Trust, we will definitely achieve our goal of assisting fellow women behind bars as well as restoring confidence in ex-female prisoners. We want to empower them to become ambassadors in their communities,” said Ms Zisengwe. Ms Chingwaramusee said she was honoured to be joining Heart of a Woman Trust and her vision during her tenure is to make a positive impact on the lives of women in prisons. “I’m highly honoured to be joining Heart of Women Trust. It is my hope and vision that during my tenure I will surely make a positive impact on the lives of women in prisons and ex-female prisoners,” she said.