The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
A MAJORITY of social media users who responded to a Twitter poll ran by Chronicle voted in favour of Highlanders FC allowing defender Peter Muduhwa to join Tanzanian champions Simba SC on a free four-month loan. Despite being undoubtedly one of the best central defenders in the country over the past few years, Muduhwa has failed to make a breakthrough outside the country to the surprise of many football followers, who rate him highly. Simba SC want the Warriors and Highlanders defender to join them on a free four-month loan to bolster their defence for the Caf Champions League mini-league phase. Many feel the defender should look for greener pastures since the resumption of local football is shrouded in uncertainty. According to poll results 63.6 percent of respondents felt it was noble to let Muduhwa go on a free loan so that he can get some game time. The other 36.4 percent said Simba must pay for Muduhwa’s services. Highlanders are seemingly unwilling to release their star defender on a free-loan, saying it does not make business sense to do so. “We haven’t received any official communication from the pursuing club. We have only been made aware through the media that there is a club interested in the services of one of our players. We will assess the offer once it’s officially on the table. We want to be involved in a deal that will benefit both the club and the player. “There is no way we will allow one of our most prized assets to walk out for free yet he has a running contract with the club. Otherwise we are open to deals that make sense to both the club and the players,” said Highlanders’ spokesperson Ronald Moyo said. In January 2017, Muduhwa and Prince Dube went for trials at the now defunct South African Premier Soccer League club Bidvest Wits and he failed to make the grade. The defender’s planned move to Sudan last year collapsed at the last minute after facilitators were reportedly angered discovering that he had an agent on the eve of his departure. The Tanzanian club has enlisted the services of football agent George Deda to negotiate on its behalf. Deda negotiated the successful move of Prince Dube Simba SC rivals Azam. — ZililoR