The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
The Kwekwe District Civil Protection Unit (CPU) has warned people to be on alert for possible flash floods as some of the district’s dams are already spilling. The flash floods have already affected some parts of the district following the incessant rains received during the past few days. Poor drainage systems have worsened the situation especially in Kwekwe city where motorists have to contend with flooded roads. Acting Kwekwe CPU Chairperson, Mr Clemence Muduma said his committee was closely monitoring dams which he said were fast filling up. “We are constantly monitoring the level of dams because they are fast filling up while others are already spilling. The threats of flash floods are now real hence we want communities to be alert so that in the event of floods they quickly move to safe areas,” said Mr Muduma. He urged families staying close to river banks to constantly monitor the water levels. “Families staying along Kwekwe and Sebakwe Rivers are under threat and we are closely monitoring the water levels,” he said. Redcliff Town Clerk, who also sits in the taskforce, Mr Gilson Chakauya said Connemara Dam was already spilling hence the communities staying close to the dam should be on alert for possible flooding. In a notice, Mr Chakauya urged all those residing within 1 100 meters from Kwekwe River and Cactus Dam, to immediately move to safer areas. Zimbabwe National Water Authority (Zinwa), Corporate Communications and Marketing Manager, Ms Marjorie Munyonga said most dams in the Midlands province are now full. “The country has recently been receiving a lot of rains and as a result most major dams in the Midlands province such as Sebakwe which supplies Kwekwe, Gwenhoro and Amapongokwe which are main sources of water for Gweru, Nyamafufu and Impali which supply Mvuma and Shurugwi respectively,are all full,” said Ms Munyonga. She said the average dam level for the province as at January 7, was 99 percent. Mrs Munyonga said some dams such as Sebakwe in Kwekwe, Ngondoma in Zhombe and Insukamini Dam in Lower Gweru were already spilling. She said the fact that most dams are already full mid-season means the risk of flooding especially for those living downstream of major dams, is very high.