The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
Midlands Province will not be the same again following the death of Foreign Affairs and International Trade Minister Dr Sibusiso Busi Moyo on Wednesday. Dr Moyo, also a Zanu-PF Senator for Mberengwa District in the province, succumbed to Covid-19 at a Harare hospital. He became popular because of the role he played during Operation Restore Legacy. Dr Moyo was the man behind the speech that heralded a new political dispensation in Zimbabwe and became a household name for displaying unparalleled bravery. Zanu-PF Midlands Provincial chairperson Engineer Daniel Mackenzie Ncube expressed shock and sadness at the untimely death of Dr Moyo. “As Midlands Province, we learnt with deep shock and disbelief the passing on of Dr SB Moyo the Minister of Foreign Affairs and International Relations. He was an illustrious son, not only for Midlands province but of Zimbabwe. His devotion to affairs of the province as one of our Politburo members earned him unmatched respect from all our cadres,” said Eng Mackenzie Ncube in a statement. He said Dr Moyo was spearheading developmental projects in the Midlands province and had identified possible investors to revive Sandawana Mine in Mberengwa. “Dr Moyo was dedicated to socio-economic development of the province and the country at large. He was pro-development and we were in Mberengwa late last year where he promised to see the revival of Sandawana Mine,” said Eng Mackenzie Ncube. He said Dr Moyo sacrificed his youth for the protracted war for the liberation of the country. “He gave up his youth to join the liberation struggle at a tender age. At independence he continued to work and sacrifice for the country as a young commander in the Zimbabwe Defence Forces,” said Eng Mackenzie Ncube. He said Dr Moyo has been at the front working to revive and maintain relations for the country. “We applaud the work he did as the face of Zimbabwe in the international scene. He was uncompromising on sovereign issues. We join his family, President Mnangagwa, Zanu-PF and the nation at large in mourning the death of this liberation steward and economic emancipator,” he said. Leader of Children of Zimbabwe War Veterans (COZWA) Cde John Muchenje said it was sad that the nation had lost a gallant son of the soil. “My interaction with him was on the mentorship for international engagements and development. A void has been created which I feel it will be difficult to close. “I regarded him as a father. Someone whom we were getting leadership guidance and we had hoped to be with him for many years but God had other plans,” he said. Mberengwa RDC chief executive officer, Mr Thompson Maeresera said they had been working well with Dr Moyo in developmental projects such as the rehabilitation of roads. He said Dr Moyo donated his personal resources for socio-economic development of Mberengwa.