The Chronicle Showbiz Reporter
Following the spike in Covid-19 cases and deaths in Zimbabwe, locals who are now realising the seriousness of the pandemic are now pleading with those showing symptoms or testing positive, not to keep this information to themselves as sharing it can save lives. Posting on her Facebook fan page, popular music promoter, Mahwindo (real name Wanisayi Mutandwa) said it is key that people share this information with those they would have interacted with at least so that they take the necessary measures. “Guys, if we met and hung out together and you know you have Covid-19, kindly tell us, there’s nothing embarrassing about it. It’s better for us to know and take precautionary measures otherwise we’ll all be affected. “Some of us are single mothers, who will our kids remain with? Please, don’t keep this information,” posted Mahwindo. This comes at a time that well known outgoing personalities are being reported to have died from the virus. Just like HIV which saw people being stigmatised, some who have been infected by coronavirus or show symptoms, have not been keen to share this information as they fear being rejected by society. Zimbabwe has had a surge in Covid-19 cases and deaths, double the number in two months, from 8 374 on November 1 to over 17 000 as of yesterday. \ These figures led Government to impose a stricter lockdown. Commenting on Mahwindo’s plea, a lot agreed with her saying people must be open if more lives are to be saved. “It’s different from HIV this corona, its killing guys so let’s be open about it,” said one. So bad is the situation that some are said to apparently be hiding the information from those they live and work with, putting their families and fellow employees at risk. Some said the best way to protect oneself after coming into close contact with people is steaming. “Try steaming alone at home. I do it each time I go out. I get back home and go straight to the bathroom, steam and bath. The clothes I’ll have worn, I put them in the laundry. Also take warm drinks. Some people won’t tell you,” commented one. Another quickly responded to this suggestion saying steaming alone does not work. Instead, they urged people to avoid going out unnecessarily as the virus is deadly. “We did this every day and many other things, but we still got infected by this corona. Just stay safe, avoid mixing with people, if you have to, practise good hand hygiene, mask up and keep your distance from other people,” wrote another. Other than sharing information, people suggested that those who show signs of flu should try by all means to avoid mixing with others.