The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
ILLEGAL money changers are finding their way into the city centre in violation of the lockdown regulations through unscrupulous means, with some openly boasting that they are bribing law enforcement agents to pass through checkpoints. Others are using fake exemption letters and medical prescriptions purportedly issued by companies and doctors to pass through roadblocks. Under level four lockdown regulations, people are supposed to be confined to their homes and may only leave to buy basic necessities at a supermarket or food retail store, or fuel or gas at a fuel or gas retail outlet, within a radius not exceeding 5 kilometres or the nearest establishment if those within the radius are closed. Government recently reviewed the curfew and banned all gatherings, except for funerals, for 30 days as the country intensifies efforts to contain a surge in Covid-19 infections. As was the case during the initial lockdown restrictions in March 2020, only essential services such as hospitals, pharmacies and supermarkets will remain open. Vice President Constantino Chiwenga, who is also the Minister of Health and Child Care, said existing Covid-19 preventive health measures should be strictly enforced. Among these are the correct wearing of face masks, social distancing, hand sanitisation and temperature checks. A Chronicle news crew yesterday took to the streets and observed that osiphatheleni were back in the streets and occupying their traditional spots in the city centre in total defiance of lockdown regulations. Some of the illegal money changers are operating from Fort Street at the corner of 10th Avenue while others have taken base between 10th and 11th Avenue along George Silundika Street. The most common spots for money changers include the vicinity of Tredgold Building, Leopold Takawira Street opposite TelOne Building while others are operating from Jason Moyo Street opposite Edgars. Posing as a potential client, this reporter spoke to some illegal money changers operating near Tredgold Building. “We are forced to enter the city centre because that is where our bread is buttered. Everyday, I come to town using my car and when police ask for an exemption letter, I produce a fake one, which I got from a friend who operates a take away restaurant,” said a money changer who only identified herself as MaNdlovu. MaNdlovu, who operates on a pavement opposite Tredgold Building, said at times she uses a medical prescription. Another illegal foreign currency dealer from Mzilikazi suburb, Ms Noma Ncube said: “I walk to town using bush pathways to avoid checkpoints. I have been surviving on this business since 2017 and therefore it means if I stay at home, I will starve with my family.” Asked on the risks of contracting Covid-19, Ms Ncube laughed at this reporter, saying she feared hunger more that the virus. “My brother, what is scarier is hunger than Covid-19. This pandemic is just like flu, which comes and goes on its own and I don’t see the reason why I should be afraid of it at the expense of my children,” she said. The news crew also observed some police officers purportedly on patrol openly mingling and openly interacting with money changers. At another popular spot near Pick n Pay TM Hyper Supermarket at Fort Street and 10th Avenue, it was business as usual as osiphatheleni traded freely. One man carrying wads of notes in both local and foreign currency, approached this reporter offering to trade. “My brother, I have an attractive rate today. We can negotiate depending on the amount you want. If you have United States dollar, I can give you ecocash at a rate of US$1:110, but if you go to others, they will offer you a rate which is lower than mine,” he said. While some of the money changers have tried to covertly conduct their operations by trading in cars, others are openly parading their business in the streets. The news crew visited some selected Western suburbs and observed that illegal foreign currency trade was thriving amid the lockdown at Sekusile Shopping Centre in Nkulumane, Entumbane Complex and Nkulumane Shopping Mall. Bulawayo police spokesperson Inspector Abednico Ncube warned violators of lockdown regulations, saying they are conducting patrols and spot checks for anyone violating lockdown regulations. “Lately, we have noted that money changers are sneaking into the city centre to conduct their illegal business. As police we are on the ground to ensure that everyone observes lockdown regulations,” said Insp Ncube. “We are conducting raids and spot checks and our commanders and officers are out in full force to ensure that there is compliance with lockdown regulations. If we find anyone violating regulations through loitering in the city centre we will arrest them.” Insp Ncube warned members of the public, both motorists and pedestrians to desist from violating lockdown regulations, saying they risked being arrested. “Even those in Western areas, they are supposed to be confined to their homes and may only leave to buy basic necessities at a supermarket or food retail store, or fuel or gas at a fuel or gas retail outlet, within a radius not exceeding five kilometres or the nearest establishment if those within the radius are closed,” said the police spokesperson. On Wednesday, police arrested 3 102 people across the country for offences related to contravening lockdown regulations. Of these, 1 294 were for unnecessary movement and 1 178 for failure to wear face masks, bringing the cumulative total of arrests to 347 264 since March 30, 2020.-@mashnets