The Chronicle Yesterday we reported that 15 people who were part of a reckless mob who attended a birthday party on Sunday in violation of lockdown regulations at a house in Nkulumane suburb had been arrested. The fun-loving mob, also attacked police officers who raided the 36th birthday party of a suspected gold dealer, Ntombizodwa Ndlovu. Police have since identified 15 others who are on the run. Confirming the incident, Bulawayo provincial police spokesperson Inspector Abednico Ncube said over 100 people attended the party in violation of the strict Covid-19 regulations announced by Government early this month. He said when police officers got to the scene, the suspects became violent and attacked them. “On 24 January 2021 at around 5.40PM, police received an anonymous tip off to the effect that there was an unsanctioned party in Nkulumane at a certain house owned by Ntombizodwa Ndlovu, a female adult aged 36 thereby violating the Covid-19 regulations,” said Insp Ncube. “The accused persons teamed up from inside and forcibly pushed the gate and attacked the police officers while some of them escaped. Police officers managed to lock the gate using handcuffs and called for a backup.” Police said the following people are still at large: Rosemary Mpala (31), Rhoda Ndlovu (59) both of Nkulumane suburb; Babra Kamanga (34) of Cowdray Park another woman also named Ntombizodwa Ndlovu (28) of Nkulumane, Brady Tshuma (29) of Nkulumane, Zanele Makiwa (30) of Lobengula West, Doubt Dube (38) of Lobengula, Gazi Tinashe (34) of Lobengula, Tshabangu Artwell Nqobile (41) of Nkulumane, Knowledge Mpumelelo Mhlanga (34) of Nkulumane, Ndlovu Nkosikhona (34) of Nkulumane, Dube Courage of Nkulumane, Eric Khumalo and Tracy Candy Nyathi both of Nketa and Brendon Sebata (32) of Khumalo suburb. At the crime scene, police recovered a big PA system comprising of four big speakers, one big blue tent and white décor material, four amplifiers, 11 empty crates of beer and two big dishes. And all this against the backdrop of Covid-19, a global pandemic which locally has killed 1 075 since March last year. As of January 25, Zimbabwe has recorded 31 646 confirmed cases, with over 200 hospitalised in the country. Do the Nkulumane party goers know any of these facts? Do they know that multiple variants of the virus that causes Covid-19 have been documented globally? Do they know that one of these variants has been detected in South Africa? Do they know that these variants spread easily and fast such that cases of Covid-19 surpass the capacity of the local healthcare system? How can so many people be so irresponsible at the same time? Covid-19 cases are rising fast and graveyards are filling up. Regulations to fight this pandemic are not meant to frustrate anyone but to save innocent lives. Violators of these regulations must be punished swiftly and severely. “Covenants, without the sword, are but words, and of no strength to secure a man at all,” philosopher Thomas Hobbes famously said. His words ring true even today, Covid-19 regulations without sword are of no strength and cannot secure the same people they are designed to protect.