The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
NEWLY licensed television station, Ke Yona TV that is set to operate from Bulawayo wants to be all-inclusive and have diverse content hence the latest decision to reach out to Zimbabwean content producers in the diaspora. Operating under Fairtalk Communications (which also operates radio stations – Skyz Metro FM and Breeze FM), Ke Yona TV was one of the six TV stations that were awarded national free-to-air commercial television licences by the Broadcasting uthority of Zimbabwe (BAZ) in November last year. After receiving the licence, the TV station successfully held its auditions for presenters and producers who are set to be unveiled once lockdown measures are eased. Now the station is reaching out to content producers who are outside the country. In an interview, chairperson of the TV station, veteran playwright and content producer Cont Mhlanga said preparations to start operations are going on smoothly. He said they are now working on setting up bases in five continents in order to draw content from Zimbabweans abroad. “We’ve identified content partners in Asia, Europe and North America who’ll assist us with the setting up of offices in these regions. Currently, we’re working on setting up bases in South America and Africa. “Ke Yona TV will be wholly a Zimbabwean affair and that’s why we’re linking up with local and foreign-based Zimbabwean content producers and actors,” said Mhlanga. He said they are reaching out to all creatives as they want to tell the Zimbabwean story effectively. “Our plan is that, from Zimbabweans abroad, we’ll take series and short dramas while for locals, we’ll take, among other things, TV soapies and talk shows. “Work on the station is in full swing as we want to connect people by telling the Zimbabwe story from anywhere around the world,” said the veteran arts practitioner. Mhlanga who did very well with his Amakhosi Theatre Productions which had top productions like Amakorokoza, said Ke Yona TV content production is expected to commence in June. “We’re progressing very well. On June 1, content production will commence as producers of comedy shows and TV soapies are already working towards scripted content which will be the cornerstone of all of our productions,” he said. According to the Broadcasting Authority of Zimbabwe (BAZ), the six television stations have 18 months to roll out operations meaning that by March, 2022 they must be running. – @mthabisi_mthire