The Chronicle Showbiz Correspondent
The modelling industry in Bulawayo has called for more to be done to protect women from sexual predators, urging those who have been abused to speak out and report the perpetrators. This follows reports that a 33-year-old man, Phakamani Sibanda, allegedly raped an 18-year-old pregnant woman during a private photoshoot in the city last month. Sibanda was arrested on Monday and appeared in court the same day. He was remanded to 15 February for continuation of trial. World over, photoshoots are the mainstay of the modelling industry and models use them to showcase themselves and build their portfolios. Veteran modelling instructor, Sipho Mazibuko said she was saddened that such abuse was happening and urged models to report sexual predators. “It’s not right for these photographers to be taking advantage of models who want photos for their portfolios. Photographers should desist from abusing these young girls. They should do what they’re meant to do, which is photography and nothing further than that. “Models shouldn’t hesitate to report them to their agencies or the police,” said Mazibuko. She advised models not to accept free services as everything comes with a price. “To the models, please don’t accept any free offers of photoshoots because there’s nothing free in this world. Everything has a catch. So, if a photographer offers you a free photoshoot, don’t accept it. “To modelling agency owners, may we please educate our models on who they can work with and what they need to look out for during the photoshoots,” said Mazibuko. Former beauty queen, Samantha Tshuma who runs Open Eye studio said models should not go to photoshoots alone. “As I always say in my classes, models should not go to photoshoots alone. They should always ask a friend or relative to accompany them! When at a shoot and they’re not comfortable with a photographer, they should not continue with the shoot. Rather they ask for a refund or report any funny behaviour directly to their agent. “They must also be careful and not accept free shoots as this is also a way to get to them,” said Tshuma. Pardon Khanye who has been in the modelling industry for some time, said he was saddened that these cases were prevalent in the industry showing that some modelling agencies are not doing their job properly. “It’s very sad that agencies and artists or model managers are not doing their job because we don’t expect to be hearing sexual harassment and abuse stories of models at photoshoots, fashion shows and the like,” said Khanye. He said those who go for photoshoots should be discouraged from doing so alone. “We have protocol we follow when doing these things. A model and photographer shouldn’t be at a photoshoot alone. A proper professional photoshoot should have at least four individuals in the room such as the shoot director, makeup artiste, wardrobe overseer and the photographer. “Furthermore, every photographer is to have an assistant either at outdoor or indoor shoots,” said Khanye. He urged models to seek the services of a manager or managers so that they avoid exploitation or abuse. “We get most of these issues from freelance models, street models and bar/club models. I personally beg models to go for proper modelling classes. Perpetrators take advantage of them because they did not undergo training at a modelling school where they are educated about their rights. The day models understand that modelling is a career just like any other profession, a lot will change,” said Khanye.