The Chronicle Yesterday we reported that the Civil Protection Unit (CPU) is on standby for evacuations in flood prone areas of the country after the Meteorological Service Department (MSD) warned that tropical cyclones and serious floods remain a real danger in the second half of the 2020/21 rainy season. Just this week, massive flooding was experienced in residential areas in the Midlands Province where a number of dams are already spilling. In Gweru, Gwenhoro Dam, the Zimbabwe National Water Authority (Zinwa) reported, is now 92 percent full yet it was only 13 percent full in November last year. White Waters Dam is now spilling at 102 percent full. Massive flooding in the city led to an Isuzu twin cab with six people on board being swept away by the flooded Gweru River on Sunday morning. Also, recently, 117 families were affected by the flash floods that hit some parts of Mutare where uncontrolled urban agriculture has led to extensive deforestation resulting in massive siltation and erosion. According to ZBC News, Mutare City has set aside US$10 000 for emergency construction works in areas affected by the recent flash floods with a major focus on improving the drainage system. In Harare, a number of families in Budiriro 5 were left marooned, while their houses and property were destroyed by flash floods after water bodies including Marimba River burst their seams. And this is only the beginning of flooding. The MSD has predicted extremely heavy rains exceeding 30 millimetres (mm) in 24 hours to sweep across most parts of the country this week. “Heavy storms, flash floods, flooding and tropical cyclones cannot be ruled out as the season progresses,” the MSD said is a statement. In most areas, the ground is already supersaturated with water, hence all rain water immediately becomes run-off and increases the chances of dangerous flash flooding countrywide. The MSD had predicted normal to above normal rainfall in the 2020/21 rainy season owing to the La Nina climate pattern in Pacific Ocean, with improved rains expected across the Sadc region. The weather forecaster said the country has recorded more than 300mm of rains so far across most parts the country, pointing to significant rainfall. CPU director Mr Nathan Nkomo told Chronicle recently that the $100 million that Government released to the CPU to attend to possible rain related disasters when cyclone Chalane was expected to hit the country will be used to attend to eventualities during the 2020/2021 rainy season. While we commend the CPU, and Government in particular, for setting aside funds for rain related disasters, more still needs to be done to educate the public and improving drainage to avoid the effect of excessive rains. It is not a secret that most city centres and urban dwellings have little or no drainage at all. The only way to be proactive is by assisting councils in clearing stormwater drains and creating new drainage systems in residential areas. Homes built on wetlands must be treated as a priority and long-term measures such as relocating residents and planting gum trees must also be rolled out. If the country does not act fast, the good rains expected this season will cease to be a blessing and become a curse.