The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
Music gurus Jah Prayzah and Winky D have thrown their weight behind MTV Africa Music Awards (Mamas) nominated artiste, Asaph and called on Zimbabweans to vote for the hip-hop star. The Mambo hit-maker who is nominated in the Listener’s Choice category is set to represent the country at the awards slated for February 20 in Kampala, Uganda. He is up against 19 other artistes from Africa including Nigeria’s Tiwa Savage, Ghana’s Sarkodie, alongside Focalistic and DBN Gogo from South Africa. The rapper booked his ticket after fans voted for him on Twitter and ZiFM Stereo, beating Jah Prayzah, Winky D, Gemma Griffiths and Sha Sha. Jah Prayzah who won the Mama Listener’s Choice Award in 2016, said he is fully behind Asaph as he deserves the recognition. “Asaph really deserves a nomination at the MTV Africa Music Awards and he’s going to do us proud as a nation. Just the nomination itself is very crucial. These are very big awards and that international recognition adds to his accomplishments. “We do hope and pray that he wins. I urge fans to support him as well because this is for Zimbabwe. He’s not doing it for himself but for the country,” said Jah Prayzah. He encouraged Asaph not to sit on his laurels but keep producing quality content. “While the award nomination and possible win is a plus, Asaph should continue pushing and producing quality content.” Winky D’s camp also urged people to rally behind the artiste saying a win for Asaph is a win for Zimbabwe and its arts industry. “We’re excited that Asaph put his best and we’re fully behind him. We wish that he takes it for the country, for himself and the music industry as a whole. “The young man should continue pushing the works, continue working hard and trying to make his mark. Things happen when you least expect them to happen,” said Jonathan Banda, Winky D’s manager. He said it was important to have more Zimbabwean artistes on such platforms. “It’s important for us to keep sending different voices and faces. Initially it was Jah Prayzah and now that we’ve sent a hip-hop artiste, it might give us the opening that we have been looking for. It’s good for all of us,” said Banda. Asaph, who is behind hits such as Mambo that topped charts in 2018, has bagged gongs at the Zim Hip Hop Awards and Roil Bulawayo Arts Awards. The singer is also a radio personality. Last year the rapper put in a lot of work as he worked with singers such as Nutty O, Gemma Griffiths and Msiz’kay. The tracks, As’pheli Moya, 263 and Like So topped charts with Like So receiving a lot of airplay on MTV. — @bonganinkunzi