The Chronicle Nelias Shiri, Chronicle Reporter
POLICE in Bulawayo are investigating allegations that a local gold buyer pointed a pistol threatening to shoot a man for repossessing a Honda Fit which he had sold to a Filabusi gold miner. The incident allegedly took place on Monday at around 2PM at Much Binding intersection along Bulawayo-Gwanda road in Worringham. The accused, of North End suburb in Bulawayo, is still at large. Bulawayo police spokesperson Inspector Abednico Ncube confirmed the incident.“Police are investigating a case of pointing a firearm by a gold buyer who is well known as Leonard of North End suburb to the complainant who is a male adult aged 34 of Barham Green, Bulawayo, for repossessing his car which he had sold to another man in Filabusi,” said Insp Ncube. Circumstances, according to police are that the complainant sold his Honda Fit to Moris Manyani Mushipe (36), a gold miner based at Bekezela Township in Filabusi, who failed to fully pay for the car. The complainant then visited Mr Mushipe and repossessed his car. He drove it back to Bulawayo and was being escorted by his friend who was also driving his unregistered Toyota Runx. “As they approached the Much Binding intersection along Gwanda road at Worringham, the complainant was intercepted by the accused person who was driving a white Toyota GD6 twin cab coming from Bulawayo. The accused person then encroached on their lane to stop the complainant and his friend. The complainant and his friend got off their vehicles and confronted the accused who quickly drew his pistol pointing and threatening to shoot the complainant over why he had re-claimed the Honda Fit,” said Insp Ncube. The complainant raised his hands to show he was not fighting the accused person. The accused person then jumped into his vehicle and drove back to Bulawayo. A police report was made at Bulawayo Central Police station. Insp Ncube said people should respect and comply with the law rather than taking the law into their own hands. He also said those with licensed firearms should use them in line with the conditions of their applications since doing otherwise is an offence.-@waydenaido