The Chronicle Fairness Moyana in Hwange
ENVIRONMENTAL agencies and local authorities should conduct post-harvest audits for commercial firewood traders before renewing licences or permits to curb rampant poaching. The Minister of State for Provincial Affairs and Devolution in Matabeleland North, Richard Moyo, said this as he expressed concern over rampant poaching of firewood in his province. He said illegal cutting down of trees for firewood was a cause for concern in Matabeleland North and this was threatening environmental sustainability. Deforestation, uncontrolled fires, poor farming methods and industrial pollution are increasingly being cited as negative factors leading to extreme climate conditions. “Regardless of the importance of indigenous trees to the well-being of Zimbabwean communities, the trees suffer heavy destruction in some areas. “While firewood has traditionally been harvested for domestic use, it has increasingly become a commercial commodity in urban areas to complement other forms of energy,” Minister Moyo said in a speech read on his behalf by deputy director in his office Mr Tapera Mugoriya during a recent tree-planting event at Chief Nekatambe’s homestead in Dete. “This has led to the unsustainable harvesting of trees in rural and peri-urban areas and the mushrooming of illegal firewood vending stalls across the country’s towns and cities including along the highways.” Minister Moyo said while some of the firewood traders were holders of legitimate licences or permits issued by the Forestry Commission and Hwange Rural District Council, conducting post-harvest audits was critical in enhancing accountability in the commercial firewood business. “I want to challenge these two authorities and other environmental agents to conduct post-harvest audits covering the areas where the firewood is coming from before renewing or issuing new licences/permits,” said Minister Moyo. He said the Forestry Commission in conjunction with the police and council rangers, should work tirelessly to curb poaching of firewood and timber, illegal transportation and trade in forest products. The minister said preservation of forests was critical for the country’s food security and nutrition and buttresses the broader climate change mitigation measures.