The Chronicle Harare Bureau
ZIMBABWE Cricket have set up regional men’s and women’s competitions that will see the game being played across all formats in a bio-secure bubble environment as part of the preparations for the upcoming international assignments against Pakistan and Afghanistan. The association’s spokesman, Darlington Majonga, said plans are at an advanced stage for the establishment of Northern and Southern Region teams ahead of next month’s engagements. The Zimbabwe senior men’s national team are set to tour Afghanistan next month for two Test matches and three T20 international games while the women’s side are expected to host Pakistan in Harare. However, the preparations have been disrupted by the coronavirus pandemic restrictions. The association has applied for exemptions from the Government in order to fulfil the fixtures. “With all domestic competitions currently on hold due to the Covid-19 restrictions imposed by the Government, the regional games will be held in a bio-secure bubble and will play a crucial role in preparing the national teams for important international assignments,” said Majonga. “On the other hand, the Zimbabwe senior women’s national team — desperate for game time having last played nearly two years ago — are in need of serious preparations before they can face their Pakistan counterparts in three one-day matches and two T20s next month. “So to make up for the time lost due to the pandemic and best prepare the national teams for the international assignments, ZC has put in place plans for the regional games that are also set to become a permanent fixture on the domestic calendar. “These games will basically serve as training camps for the national sides,” said Majonga. Zimbabwe national team batting coach Stuart Matsikenyeri was named as the Northerns men head coach and will be assisted by Eric Chauluka. The other members of the technical side are Stanley Chioza (fielding coach), Njabulo Ncube (bowling coach), Walter Karimanzira (fitness coach) and Travor Wambe (physiotherapist). Southerns will be led by national team bowling coach Douglas Hondo (head coach) with Mufaro Chiturumani as assistant coach. Shepherd Makunura (fielding coach), Walter Chawaguta (batting coach), Walter Karimanzira (fitness trainer) and Travor Wambe (physiotherapist) complete the Southerns’ technical set-up. Zimbabwe and Afghanistan are still to agree on the finer details of the tour, which is likely to take place in Oman. Zimbabwe Cricket director of cricket Hamilton Masakadza said the dates originally suggested by the Afghanistan Cricket Board were too close to the recent announcement of a sporting ban in Zimbabwe as a result of the rise of Covid-19 cases. The Chevrons faced a huge dilemma since they had no enough time to prepare for the series. Their opponents Afghanistan are currently hosting Ireland in United Arab Emirates. The women’s side are set to break their two-year hiatus from international cricket when they play Pakistan in three one-dayers and two T20 matches in Harare next month. The proposed tour, which is subject to approval from the government due to the Covid-19 restrictions currently in place, will be held in a bio-secure bubble with no spectators allowed at the match venue. All matches are scheduled to be played at Harare Sports Club, starting with the one-dayers on February 11, 13 and 15. The T20 games have been set for February 18 and 20 February. “The series will mark the first time the Zimbabwe senior women’s team will be involved in international cricket since May 2019. “Both Zimbabwe and Pakistan will be using the tour as part of their preparations for the ICC Women’s World Cup Qualifier 2021, a 10-team tournament that will be held in June and July. “The top three teams from that qualifying event will progress to the 50-over ICC Women’s Cricket World Cup 2022 in New Zealand. “The Pakistan senior women’s team are currently touring South Africa and agreed to stop over in Harare after Zimbabwe Cricket (ZC) engaged the Pakistan Cricket Board prior to the latest Covid-19 lockdown restrictions imposed by the Government. “But ZC, having already successfully hosted domestic competitions in a controlled environment, will host the Pakistan women series in a bio-secure bubble in order to greatly minimise the risk of the coronavirus spreading,” said ZC in a statement. ZC have also set up Northern and Southern teams for the preparations. Former fast bowler Trevor Garwe will be the head coach at Northerns women, with Susan Kudzibatira as his assistant.