The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
Just two days into 2021, the local arts sector was plunged back to the 2020 nightmare after Government announced stricter lockdown regulations. The new lockdown measures were announced on Saturday by Vice-President Constantino Chiwenga, who is also the Minister of Health and Child Care. The decision was made in the face of rising Covid-19 cases in the country. Gatherings such as weddings and churches are banned for 30 days and also affected by the ban are bars, bottle stores, gyms and restaurants. Formal and non-formal businesses will be suspended from today but essential services such as hospitals, pharmacies and supermarkets are to remain open, with only essential staff allowed to go to work. Pharmacies and supermarkets will be operating from 8am to 3pm. This means the arts industry which was slowly opening up has been closed again and no source of income for artistes. Artistes who spoke to Chronicle Showbiz said they were stuck between a rock and a hard surface. They said while they supported measures to stop the spread of the virus, their concern was that many of them will not have any source of income during the 30 days. “The lockdown though painful is good. We don’t want to die as artistes, we want to feel safe. Although this will mean that we no longer have shows that pay us, I think we’d rather be safe than die,” said Sandra Ndebele. Cde Phil who is a wedding MC said weddings he had lined up in January have been postponed or cancelled. “The new measures will hit hard especially us in the events industry. I’d weddings lined up for January and also February but these measures will mean postponement of weddings,” he said. He however said like the rest of Zimbabweans, artistes have to adapt to the new normal hoping the lockdown won’t take long like was the case in 2020. Comedian Dumisani “MaForty” Ndlovu said: “The new lockdown restrictions affect my upcoming show. You know l had gathered momentum from October and was preparing to do even more this year”. Prince Joel who plays keyboard for various bands in Bulawayo said the new restrictions are coming before they have received Covid-19 relief funds to cushion them from last year’s effects. “It’s really sad because this is coming just as we thought we were getting back on our feet after losing out last year. We submitted our names for the relief fund twice and we are yet to get the money,” said Prince Joel. DJ Mzoe, said they had started getting income from shows. “It’s bad for us as DJs who live off shows and functions. I am hired as a DJ so without functions it means no business for me,” he said.