The Chronicle Bridget Sibanda, Chronicle Reporter
THE country’s largest inland dam Tugwi-Mukosi is spilling for the first time since its construction, following heavy rains recorded in most parts of the country with authorities urging villagers downstream of the dam to exercise caution. Built at the confluence of Tugwi and Mukosi rivers in Chivi District, Masvingo, the purpose of the dam is to provide irrigation water to the Lowveld sugar estates and surrounding communal farmers. The dam also has the capacity for hydro-electric power generation and can generate six megawatts. According to statistics provided by the Zimbabwe National Water Authority (Zinwa) on its Twitter account on Saturday, the 1,8 billion cubic metre water body was 98,18 percent full and by yesterday morning it was spilling. Zinwa spokesperson Mrs Marjorie Munyonga said the dam is experiencing spillage for the first time since its commissioning in 2017. She said the spilling of the dam was a good development as there is now water security in the lowveld areas to support agricultural activities. She urged communities living downstream of the dam and to be on high alert. “The rivers are experiencing increased inflows and therefore those living near the rivers should not attempt to cross the rivers or practise any agricultural activities along the rivers and most of all they should not put livestock or carry out any agricultural practices along the rivers. They should also avoid activities like swimming or children playing in the river because it is not safe,” said Mrs Munyonga. She also said there was no flooding in the area yet but because the dam is full, the surrounding community should be cautious and change their way of living to accommodate the increased inflows received by the rivers and if the rains persist, they could be at high risk. Our Harare Bureau reported last week that the district authorities and the Civil Protection Unit (CPU) together are already on high alert with the Air Force of Zimbabwe ready to evacuate the people in the case that the areas downstream are affected by floods. @sibbsmorale