The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Acting Business Editor
THE Confederation of Zimbabwe Retailers (CZR) is satisfied with the level of compliance to Covid-19 lockdown restrictions so far exhibited by retailers and wholesalers. Following the outbreak of Covid-19 in the country last March, Government in a bid to curb the spread of the pandemic, enforced a lockdown on March 30. It then relaxed the lockdown regulations and opened up some economic activities around September but last week Government was forced to tighten again the lockdown regulations following a spike in Covid-19 cases. The CZR president Mr Denford Mutashu said following the announcement of stricter lockdown regulations last week, the sector had received tremendous positive feedback that the retail and wholesale sector was complying with the strict lockdown regulations. “A snap survey carried out by the sector since the new lockdown regulations came into effect, confirmed that shops are adhering to the regulations which among other requirements make it mandatory for workers and customers to among other things, wear masks, sanitise and maintain social distancing. Mr Mutashu said most retail outlets and wholesales have so far ensured customer traffic into shops is limited to promote social distancing while canteen chairs were reduced and spaced. “Temperature checks at entrances are now mandatory with most retailers putting screen guards at till points to reduce till operators’ direct interface with the customers. “This has seen each serving area with a sanitiser. “Till operators are sanitising their hands constantly after handling cash and customer swipe cards,” he said, urging the public to religiously mask up, sanitise and practice social distancing as well as avoiding unnecessary movements. CZR has also noted that most shops are prepacking fruits and vegetables to avoid situations whereby customers touch the fruits or vegetables with bare hands. The retail and wholesale businesses are among businesses such as manufacturing, distribution, commerce, tourism and hospitality industry that have been declared essential services. These businesses are allowed to operate during the lockdown period as long as they adhere to the Covid-19 guidelines set by the Government. The CZR president said it was encouraging to note that shops have complied with the opening and closing times of 8am to 3pm. The retailers’ representative body also urged customers to do their shopping within the stipulated times to avoid piling pressure at shops at closing hours.
-@okazunga