The Chronicle Midlands Bureau Chief
Government has noted with concern the increase in Covid-19-induced lockdown violations especially at funerals at a time when deaths related to the virus have surpassed the 1 000 mark. As of January 20, a total of 347 264 arrests were made countrywide for flouting of lockdown regulations, indicating an increase of 19 188 from the 32 8076 that was recorded the previous week. In his weekly Covid-19 taskforce statement yesterday, the acting Minister of Information Publicity and Broadcasting Services Dr Jenfan Muswere said there is an upsurge in people breaking lockdown rules and regulations especially at funerals. He said despite the upsurge in the number of infections and deaths related to the disease, it has been noted that there is a section of society that continues to wantonly disregard lockdown procedures. Dr Muswere said 7 082 people were arrested throughout the country for violating movement restrictions in the past week. He urged Zimbabweans to continue to lookout for each other and to encourage behaviour change in line with set out protocols. While proper wearing of masks has proven to be effective against transmission, he said, a considerable number of people have been arrested for flouting this requirement. “Last week, 11 171 offenders were arrested for wilfully disregarding the proper wearing of masks. Cumulatively the total arrested since the onset of the lockdown is now 119 557,” he said. “On a daily basis, we continue to lose our loved ones and we are saddened to report that our death toll has reached the 1 000-mark figure. It is incumbent upon all Zimbabweans to play a role in contributing towards the containment of this disease, lest we all perish.” Dr Muswere said President Mnangagwa in his weekend address to the nation, implored Zimbabweans to work together, to show a common unity of purpose if the country is to defeat Covid-19. The President, Dr Muswere said, further highlighted that the disease knows no boundaries. He said President Mnangagwa noted that the country has lost loved ones and ministers across the political divide. “It is quite saddening that the proliferation of fake news continues unabated all for the sake of scoring cheap political mileage. “To this end social media has been awash with fake news of the deaths and ill health of prominent members of the society including celebrating the death of some among us. Without unity of purpose, and a common vision in fighting the disease, we will all perish. To this end, we call upon all Zimbabweans to remember the notion of Ubuntu, ‘I am because we are’. Now more than ever, we need each other and we need a shared national vision,” he said. He said the onus is on all Zimbabweans to adhere to Covid-19 protocols to flatten the curve. “As the President highlighted, the disease respects no boundary. As of 25 January, the country has recorded 31 646 positive cases, 22 877 recoveries and 1 075 deaths. This should be a wakeup call to all of us to do something to halt the unfolding problem, now is the time to galvanise our efforts so as to stop the spread of the disease,” said Dr Muswere. He thanked the media for keeping the country informed and educated about Covid-19. “Government is grateful for the continued support from the various stakeholders who are rendering support in the information dissemination field. An informed nation results in an empowered people,” he said. Dr Muswere said various developmental partners across the country have been assisting in various ways in the production of Covid-19 material adding that the gesture is commendable. He said the Government owes all health workers and frontline staff a debt of gratitude. “Those who work on the red zones which deal with the care of Covid-19 patients are surely our heroes and heroines as we continue to fight this deadly disease our Government is committed to the eradication of Covid-19 and we are hopeful that we will succeed,” he said. Dr Muswere said a large section of Zimbabweans who have been shining beacons in society by way of adhering to lockdown statutes must be commended. He said President Mnangagwa has advised that help is on the horizon. Dr Muswere said on a positive note, the recovery rate has been increasing significantly. Treasury, he said, has also set aside resources for vaccine purchases with assistance from the private sector. “We encourage you to play your part from home. What is needed is a shared national vision, all differences, of whatever nature, must be set aside. President Mnangagwa captured the essence of this spirit in his weekend address, saying, “now is the time to strengthen that unity, determination and shared sense of purpose. As before, we summon that inner resource, individually and collectively, to yet again win the war and vanquish the enemy. You, me, all of us becoming each other’s keeper,” said Dr Muswere.