The Chronicle There are basically two key ways, the F and F by which to survive this world imperilled by Covid-19, and of which Zimbabwe is an integral part. An unmitigated fear of God by shunning evil, and undiluted faith in the Almighty God combine into a master key to unlock the door to the Holy Spirit, a member of Holy Trinity of God the Father, God the Son and God the Holy Spirit — or for lay people to which this discourse is mainly directed — the holy heath stones on which the pot of an eternal life cooks and cooks very, very, very well indeed. Sent down to earth by God as a helper to humanity after Jesus Christ completed his mission and returned home to His Father in Heaven, the Holy Spirit teaches those He indwells about the risks inherent in sexual immorality, probably the main, original conveyor belt of the deadly coronavirus now tearing our world apart, leaving millions of its victims in graves, millions of others in sick beds, and also teaches believers in God about the ancillary agents in the spread of the virus, namely coughing and sneezing which spreads droplets containing the deadly virus to interlocutors close by, thereby also putting them on fire. For example, some young men and young women in the courtship phase sexually sample each other for the boy to discover if his partner has the attributes of a woman and vice versa, to marry and settle down, thereby infecting one another or spreading Covid-19 in the process. Secondly, men with a propensity for flaunting their masculinity resort to womanising, thereby contaminating either party or propagating the disease widely. Thirdly a wife starved of her matrimonial rights in a polygamous marriage while the husband is doing rounds with her co-wives might engage in extramarital relationships to satiate her sexual desire and in the process bringing home Covid-19 from the infected man or contaminating her secret lover. The Holy Spirit guides Christians to avoid the pitfalls in point above while at the same time prompting them to abide by World Health Organisation and our government’s set guidelines, among them masking up and sanitising to curb the spread of the killer virus to other people. Add to the good work of the Holy Spirit cited above, His power to heal generational curses and various, other intractable diseases with which the thief, killer and destroyer, otherwise known as the Devil, infects God’s loved ones. But alas what do we see happening in the world, not to mention here in our own homeland which boasts one of the highest literacy ratings on the African continent — a record also suggesting that the young educated and the functionally literate have heard or know pretty well God’s commandments and other commands immortalised in His book, the Holy Bible which they or other members of their families possess or go to church where they are taught God’s word. Some people are known to have been heard wondering aloud if there is God in Heaven; otherwise why was the Covid-19 pandemic wreaking havoc in Zimbabwe and the rest of the global village. These doubting Thomases obviously want God to come down and wait on them, like slaves on their masters, in order for them to believe that God truly exists. But the Church, as the body of Christ exists in Zimbabwe as well as in other countries to stand in, as it were for the Creator of the human race and other creatures. However, it cannot and should not be expected to draw these horses by their bridles to the river itself and make the mounts drink the living waters, the world of God, while the Devil, God’s enemy, remains intractably ensconced in the saddle. What a tragic irony of ironies! But come to think of it, God’s word as contained in the Bible and taught in His Church says that if His people, called by His name would humble themselves and call on Him to intervene in their trials and tribulations He will hear them and rescue them. The Almighty is not a human being that he says what he cannot fulfil. Indeed, if those who believe in Him pray and fast without seizing God the Almighty will answer their prayers and walk them through these almost palpably-dark days of a dying world.