The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent YOUTHS in the arts sector in Matabeleland North have been urged to diversify and engage in other income generating projects in order to survive under the “new normal”. The call was made last Friday during the province’s Youth in Arts Mentorship and Empowerment programme which was hosted by 4-H Zimbabwe and Shangano Arts Trust. During the programme which was conducted online, artistes bemoaned the adverse effects of the Covid-19-induced lockdown which closed their traditional sources of revenue. The artistes said due to the lockdown they can no longer hold live shows which were their major sources of income.
Creative artistes have however, diversified and engaged income generating projects such as farming. Veteran poet Albert Nyathi said: “The situation is hard for all of us. Let’s diversify our sources of income and try projects like chicken rearing and gardening that can be done in the comfort of our homes. People are dying so don’t risk catching the disease but be productive.” Turning to artistes arts careers, Nyathi said this was an opportune time for creatives to perfect their art. “This is a time to write about anything that inspires you, polish your art, rehearse, look at yourself in the mirror and when we come out of this, you would have perfected your art, worked online and adapted,” he said. Sungano Chisina who is the head of business unit at the Zimbabwe Youth Council also encouraged youths to find other means to survive. He said they should also use their talents to disseminate important information in their different communities to reduce the spread of the pandemic. “Use your creativity to help comfort those who have lost their loved ones and others trying to overcome the disease. You can also communicate the relevant information from Government to communities through arts. You can use mediums of communication such as online galas to disseminate vital information thereby complementing Government efforts to provide information to communities,” said Chisina.