The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Gwanda Correspondent
POLICE in Matabeleland South province have warned locals against disregarding Covid-19 lockdown regulations especially in Gwanda Central and outlying areas. Members of the public in the province have generally been defying the regulations with more than 1 000 being arrested since the inception of the lockdown early this month. Under the newly imposed Level 4 lockdown, members of the public who are not providing essential services are required to stay at home. Yesterday, Chronicle observed that Gwanda residents continue to go about their business despite the deadly virus which is infecting hundreds and killing people daily. On January 19, the country recorded 783 new cases and 53 deaths with cumulative cases numbering 28 675, 18 110 recoveries and 825 deaths had been recorded. The news crew observed that touts for buses and kombis that ply the Gwanda-Bulawayo route were at work, despite the ban of inter-provincial travel. Cars were moving around town in search of passengers from 1st Avenue to 6th Avenue near Gwanda Zimbabwe Prison and Correctional Services offices. Money changers along 2nd Avenue, 3rd Avenue, 5th Avenue and Main Street in front of the closed Bata shop were working. Some youngsters were doing photoshoots along 1st Avenue, thereby defying the call for people to desist from unnecessary movement. Informal traders, cellphone sales and repair shops were open. Vendors selling cigarettes were back at street corners in town. Car sale and car wash businesses were also operational. Scores of people from rural areas were at wholesale shops buying goods for resale at growth points while not observing social distancing. In western suburbs that include Jahunda, Geneva, Phakama and Spitzkop scores of residents not providing essential services were roaming around the streets. Many of them were not wearing their masks. Matabeleland South provincial police spokesperson Inspector Loveness Mangena said more than 1 000 people have been arrested in the province’s seven districts for defying the lockdown regulations. “Between January 5 and 19, 1 273 people were arrested in the province. The arrested people include among others; people failing to wear masks, failing to comply with business operation hours, violation of movement restrictions, failure to comply with the Road Traffic Act (RTA) and failure to comply with the Liquor Act. “As police we want to reiterate that we will be more visible on the ground where police patrols will be intensified,” said Insp Mangena. She said police would not hesitate to arrest those who breach the law. “As police we will continue to ensure that Covid-19 regulations are followed as roadblocks on feeder roads will not allow anyone to pass without a genuine reason. “We continue to serve the people not only on Covd-19 related measures but also on other crime matters,” said Insp Mangena. — @mthabisi_mthire