The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
Kwekwe District has reactivated its taskforce on Covid-19 to help implement and enforce a strict lockdown imposed by the Government at the weekend amid a surge in Covid-19 cases during the just-ended festive season. Vice President Constantino Chiwenga who is also the Minister of Health and Child Care, announced the strict lockdown which bans bars, bottle stores and gyms from operating, suspends all informal trading and restricts gatherings among other measures. This was in response to a surge in Covid-19 cases across the country with 1 342 cases and 29 deaths being recorded in a single week. Following the pronouncement, Kwekwe District sprang into action and reactivated the taskforce which last met a few months ago as lockdown measures continued to ease. The district recorded 75 cumulative cases during the festive season and 63 of those have since recovered while six are still active. Six deaths have been recorded in the district since the beginning of the festive season. The taskforce, among other major issues, agreed on banning unnecessary movement of people especially into the city centre, implementation of curfew and business operating times as well as banning of vehicles unnecessarily accessing fuel. The taskforce will also clamp down on illegal kombis and shebeens that usually sprout during such lockdowns. Acting Taskforce Chairperson, who is also Assistant District Development Coordinator for the district, Mr Clemence Muduma said the taskforce was reactivated to help implement the lockdown as announced by the Government. “The reason for the reactivation of this august gathering is to help implement and enforce as well as mobilise resources that are needed for the proper implementation of the lockdown as announced by the Government. “We are therefore activating all the subcommittees to ensure that we are well prepared for any eventualities,” said Mr Muduma. The taskforce also agreed that police and army officers will help implement the lockdown measures through mounting roadblocks as well as increased patrols. About 500 litres of fuel have since been mobilised for the operations. The taskforce also identified isolation centres. “We therefore agreed that so far we use Kwekwe General Hospital as our major isolation centre. Mbizo 16 clinic which was our isolation centre before, was deemed not fit so we are looking for other options that we can use as isolation centres,” said Mr Muduma. Bale Medical Centre in Redcliff is still undergoing renovations with the prospects of being used as an isolation centre. Garandichauya Beerhall which is being converted into an infectious diseases hospital, is also set to be used as an isolation centre soon after completion. The institution is set to be completed within the first quarter of the year. The taskforce which is made up of representatives of Government institutions, companies, private institutions, media and businesspeople among other stakeholders, is however set to meet virtually to avoid meeting physically and risk spreading the disease.