The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
THE country’s trade development and promotion agency, ZimTrade, has urged local farmers to intensify production of ginger and turmeric, riding on the rising demand of the crops on the world market. According to Trade Map, the demand is anchored on the health benefits and versatile uses of ginger and turmeric around the world. The global trade bill of ginger has over the past five years been growing from US$853 million in 2015 to US$1,05 billion last year. For turmeric, the world import bill has been growing from around US$219 million recorded in 2015 to US$289 million in 2019. “The global demand for ginger and turmeric is on an upward trend. These are some of the products considered to be healthy and have versatile uses across the world, ranging from spices, tea, and medicine. “Both ginger and turmeric are perceived to have health benefits for treating problems such as stomach problems, diarrhoea, inflammation and nausea,” said ZimTrade. “With Zimbabwe being home to some of the best organic producers around the world, there is potential for local farmers to tap into the growing global market for ginger and turmeric.” Major global importers for ginger are the US, Japan, Netherlands, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Germany. “Of these importers, Zimbabwean farmers are already supplying Netherlands with produce such as flowers and peas, which could provide a gateway for those intending to increase ginger exports to Europe,” said the agency. In Africa, some of the top 2019 importers of ginger, according to Trade Map, were Morocco (US$14,8 million), Egypt (US$4,4 million), Algeria (US$2,8 million), South Africa (US$2,6 million), and Nigeria (US$2,1 million). In the Southern African Development Community (Sadc) where local farmers can leverage on proximity to supply the markets, ZimTrade said some of the countries with potential to buy ginger from Zimbabwe include South Africa, Botswana, Seychelles, Namibia, and Angola. Mauritius, Zambia, and Lesotho can also provide markets for Zimbabwe-grown ginger.
At present, India is the leading producer in the world and more than 50 percent of the total ginger is produced under organic conditions. “For Zimbabwe, figures available on Trade Map indicate that exports of ginger and turmeric have been insignificant over the past few years, albeit potential to supply and dominate in regional and international markets. “This is the same case with turmeric production and exports,” it said. With regards to potential revenue, the price for ginger in major international markets has been averaging US$3,36 per kilogramme between last August and November, according to International Trade Centre. For turmeric, there has also been a rising demand globally for household consumption and the medicinal industry, which is expected to further boost demand. Major importers of turmeric are US, India, Iran, the United Kingdom, Bangladesh, Germany, Malaysia and Japan. “South Africa, Botswana and Mauritius are Sadc countries that local farmers can consider supplying. “The commercially grown varieties include Alleppey, duggirala, armoor, Suvarna and these are also available in markets throughout the year. “Regarding potential revenue, turmeric has been selling at an average price of US$5,34 per kg — with the highest price reaching US$9,11 per kg between last August and November,” said ZimTrade. – @okazunga