The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
MULTI-AWARD winning musician-cum-actor Madlela Skhobokhobo who celebrated his 41st birthday yesterday said his focus this year is on unleashing new talent. Last year, a selfless Skhobokhobo helped Nkayi Maskandi musician, Clopas Skhosana realise his music dream after he tracked him down in the rural areas and facilitated recording sessions and interviews for him in Bulawayo. Within a short space of time, Skhosana was popular with a lot of people taking interest in his music career. Motivated by this, Skhobokhobo who has eight awards, yesterday said he is raring to unleash more new talent as a way of developing the arts sector. “This year and going forward, we need to do what we did for Skhosana to many people out there especially the young ones, who’re very talented. They just need a platform or a little push for them to make it in the industry,” said Skhobokhobo. “My media company, Shilolo Media House will start working with young people soon to share whatever we know and see how best we can create stars and grow this industry.” Reflecting on his career, Madlela said he is yet to reach the peak of his arts talent. “There’s still so much that I need to achieve on the music side of my career. On the film side, I’ve not even started. So much is coming beyond this corona as I’ve so many plans,” he said. Refusing to share details, Skhobokhobo said he will be following God’s calling on a project he has stalled for too long. “For a long time, I’ve been running away from a project that God wanted me to do, but I think I’m ready now so people must brace for it. It’ll shock some and bless some. I can’t disclose this project as I want it to be a surprise, but all I can say is that this year is promising to be a good one,” said Dlelas, as the artiste is affectionately known. Reflecting on his career, Skhobokhobo said: “It took me years to breakthrough but in God’s time, everything started falling into place. I suppose if the breakthrough came when I was still very young, I could be dead by now, but it came when I was very mature, knowing what was best for me and my family.“ I’m glad it came when I’d established a proper foundation (relationship with God) and because of that, I’m unshakable. Ngiqine saka njengesambane sika naJeremiah (I’m as fit as a fiddle).” Turning to his personal life, a seemingly content Skhobokhobo who got married two years ago said he is happy that his family is growing. “The family is intact and I’m grateful to my wife for standing with me in all those stormy years. “She gave me four beautiful kids and honestly, what more can I possibly want,” he said. – @mthabisi_mthire