The Chronicle Boitumelo Makhurane, Chronicle Reporter
SOME pupils writing their final examinations arrived late for exams this week due to transport challenges and the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education allowed them to write their tests. After Government imposed a lockdown last weekend, it directed that public examinations should continue, hence pupils in exam classes have been going to school. As a result, Form Four and Form Six candidates started going to school for the exams earlier this week. However, some of the pupils have been arriving at school late due to transport challenges. The Education Ministry has been accommodating those who arrive at the examination centres late, before the end of the exam. The late comers are accommodated in other rooms to write their examinations without having contact with those who might have started on time. The Education Ministry has since engaged the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructural Development to prioritise learners going for public examinations when boarding Zupco buses. In an interview, the Communications and Advocacy director in the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education, Mr Taungana Ndoro said all those scheduled to write examinations and wanted to write them managed to do so. “There were challenges on Tuesday but we quickly acted on it and all the candidates who wanted to write were given the opportunity”, he said. “There are instances when the exam starts at 8am ending at 10am for example, so if you are late the invigilators will make arrangements that you write without mixing with those who have already started. “There might be rare instances of those coming after the exam is finished. Zimsec officials and invigilators on the ground will assess and assist genuine cases.” Before the school term ended last year, a number of Covid-19 cases were recorded at some schools countrywide. Last week, Zimbabwe School Examinations Council spokesperson Ms Nicky Dlamini said while the examinations council administers the examinations, the Education Ministry was responsible for ensuring centres are Covid-19 prepared. Mr Ndoro said the Ministry is strictly implementing Standard Operating Procedures to minimise the pupils exposure to the pandemic. The procedures entail that temperature checks are conducted while schools are required to have temporary isolation rooms for those found with high temperatures, before they are referred to health facilities. Physical distancing of at least one metre must be adhered to by both teachers and learners while surfaces such as door handles, desks, toys, light switches, door frames will be frequently disinfected to prevent the spread of Covid-19.