The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
Former Mokis Connection lead guitarist, Orchard “Chiseru” Khuphe, the only surviving guitarist from the band’s brightest era says they are planning on regrouping the remaining former band members for an album to honour their late colleagues. Chiseru who is taking a break from music in Cape Town, South Africa is one of Zimbabwe’s most popular Rhumba guitarists. He said as remaining members of the band, they have a duty to honour their departed brothers. Remaining members are Themba Boyoyo Mathe who was the main lead vocalist, Josiah Nswabanda Nkomo who was also a lead vocalist and Khohlwani and Samathwala. “In December, I was with Boyoyo and we agreed that we must reunite the remaining former Mokis members and record an album. For me, this will be done to try and help our former lead vocalist, Boyoyo, a legend of Rhumba who needs our help since he is blind,” Chiseru said.“We’ve planned a meeting with the remaining guys so that we address some issues and see how best to move forward. We need to find solution to the challenges because our things aren’t going well.” Born in Masendu area in Bulilima District in Matabeleland South Province in 1982, Chiseru was part of the trailblazing Mokisi Connection band that ruled the roost with hits like Basi Boy, Irene, Madawu, Ndazi Ndazi and Wafa Wafa Mthakathi in the early 2000s. Over the years, he played for a number of musicians including Allen Ndoda, Madala Boy and Khumbulani Skuza, Mxolisi “Mr Bones” Ndlovu and Tsheba Boys. “I joined Mokis Connection in 2000 and stayed till 2005 when I left the band. There were disagreements over money issues and the sickness and death of some of our members didn’t sit well with me so I left the band,” he said. The band then was made up of Khumbula Mhlanga (late) who played rhythm, Orchard “Chiseru” Khuphe (lead guitar), Skhonanathi Ndlovu (late) bass and Layton Ngozi (late) on drums. The band had nimble-footed dancers in the form of popular Phikile Samathwala Bhebhe who used to lift a wheelbarrow when dancing, Khohlwane Madabe Ndebele and Rabson Gobiqolo Siziba (late). Chiseru said he took a break around 2014 because of violent fights in the Rhumba circles as bands battled for supremacy. “I took a break and came to Cape Town to start a new life. I still play, but I’m not happy with what’s happening in the Rhumba genre at the moment,” he said. Despite the challenges they faced as a band, Chiseru said the best part of his musical career was with Mokis Connection. “Mokis was good at entertaining the crowds,” he said. “The band was a combination of the best with the humorous and unique Boyoyo on the lead vocals. “Our live performances were top drawer as we had songs like iBhara, Wafa Wafa, Mahlalela and Irene where we acted out dramas during the shows. This sent the crowds into a frenzy.” He said the band was able to record two albums per year as they had more than one lead singer.The name Chiseru, the guitarist said, was given to him soon after his birth as his mother was an avid Kanindo music lover. The song Kiseru was her favourite. – @themkhust