The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
TANZANIAN champions Simba SC are reportedly plotting to raid Highlanders for the services of defender Peter Muduhwa, who might join the East Africans on a loan deal that will see him playing in the Caf Champions League. According to impeccable sources, Simba are looking at reinforcing their squad in preparation for the money-spinning Caf Champions League mini-league stage and they were impressed by Muduhwa’s performance against Cameroon in the opening Chan match that Zimbabwe lost 1-0. Simba swooped on FC Platinum striker Perfect Chikwende last Friday and have been assessing clubless Zimbabwean defender Kelvin Moyo, who left South African Premiership side Chippa United last year. They are keen to land Muduhwa on a short-term loan that might culminate in a permanent deal. Should Highlanders agree to Simba’s proposal, the defender, who can also play as an anchorman, will be registered for the Caf Champions League before the month end deadline. “Simba are looking for a central defender and Muduhwa is one of the players they have identified. He has the right height, stamina and above all experience. With Tanzania’s transfer window having closed last Friday, the club wants Muduhwa specifically for the Caf Champions League. Should he impress during those Caf Champions League matches, that will open the way for a permanent move,” said the source. Simba knocked out Zimbabwe champions FC Platinum from the Caf Champions League and were drawn in Group A with continental champions Al Ahly of Egypt, DR Congo’s AS Vita and Sudanese giants Al Merrikh in the mini-league phase. Simba’s Caf Champions League group games start on the weekend of February 12-13 and the last matches are scheduled for April 9-10. If they finish among the top two, they will proceed to the quarter-finals. The Caf Champions League final is expected to be played sometime in May. With the Zimbabwe league indefinitely suspended due to Covid-19, playing continental football will be a big break for Muduhwa, as he will be able to market himself, while Bosso stands to financially benefit from his move. Highlanders chief executive officer Nhlanhla Dube said they are yet to receive an official inquiry for the player. “Nothing official has been brought to the table. I think it’s premature to talk about that (Simba’s interest on Muduhwa) at this stage. When the time is right, you will be informed accordingly,” said Dube. — @ZililoR