The Chronicle Harare Bureau
ENERGY and Power Development Minister Soda Zhemu, has challenged the new Zimbabwe Energy Regulatory Authority (Zera) board to ensure availability of reliable and affordable energy as the sector is critical for the attainment of an upper middle class economy by 2030. The minister said this at the announcement of the new board on Wednesday. The eight-member board is chaired by Dr David Madzikanda and will be deputised by Engineer Farai Mavhiya. The other members are chief executive officer, Mr Eddington Mazambani, Thembelani Ncube, Masimba Kambarami, Tambudzai Madzivire and Dr Sosten Ziuku. Minister Zhemu told the board that it was important that they adhere to a strict tenets of good corporate governance as they were sacrosanct in the Second Republic. “You are coming in at a time when the Government has made its economic development trajectory clear as espoused in the National Development Strategy 1, which was launched by His Excellency (President Mnangagwa) in November 2020,” he said. “The country envisions to join the league of Upper Middle-Income States by 2030 and access to and provision of clean, affordable and reliable energy is a critical enabler towards attainment of this vision. “A lot is expected from you to provide regulatory leadership of the entire energy sector in Zimbabwe in a fair, transparent, efficient and cost effective manner for the benefit of consumers and energy suppliers.” The Zera board is made up of experts in various sectors that include engineering, petroleum and accountancy. The minister said two more female members would be appointed in due course once the vetting process is complete. Minister Zhemu said the country expected results from the board and challenged them to get down to work immediately. “I want you to rise above regulatory issues and provide vision and direction of the sector,” he said. “I expect you to provide contemporary and professional advice to me as your Minister on all matters relating to the energy industry in order to make the sector competitive. I also expect you to assess, promote studies of and advise me as your Minister and licensees on the environmental impact of energy projects before licensing,” he said.