The Chronicle Nelias Shiri, Court Reporter
A GANG of suspected robbers allegedly attacked and robbed a Bulawayo motorist of his recently imported vehicle worth US$4 000 at knifepoint soon after he had stopped to rescue his two neighbours whom they were attacking. Michael Khumalo (25), Bhekani Ndlovu (20) both of Cowdray Park suburb, Lindani Mpala (20) of Gwabalanda suburb and Mbekezeli Brighton Sibanda (24) of Mbundane allegedly robbed their victims of a Toyota Mark II and two cellphones all valued at US$4 250. The four accused persons appeared before Bulawayo magistrate Ms Linear Khumalo facing two counts of robbery and carjacking. They were denied bail and remanded in custody to February 23. The prosecutor, Mr Nkathazo Dlodlo, said on New Year’s Day shortly after 10PM, the accused persons spotted the two complainants, Mr Ngqabutho Ndebele and Kholwani Ngwenya as they were walking in the street. Ndebele of Gwabalanda was accompanying Ngwenya to his place of residence in Luveve suburb. The four men, who were hiding in a secluded place under the cover of darkness, confronted the two men. They allegedly grabbed Ndebele and Ngwenya and one of the accused placed a knife on Ndebele’s neck threatening to kill him. They ordered the two complainants to lie down and they searched their pockets and took their cellphones, an iPhone S4 and a Samsung. The court heard that Mr Thembelani Mbomboya of Gwabalanda suburb was driving past when he spotted the two men attacking Ndebele and Ngwenya. Mbomboya had four people in his car. “Thembelani Mbomboya was driving his car, an unregistered white Toyota Mark II when he spotted his two neighbours being attacked by the four accused persons. He immediately stopped his car so that he could rescue Ndebele and Ngwenya from the accused persons,” said Mr Dlodlo. They four men turned the heat on Mbomboya. They confronted him before they removed the keys from the ignition port and ordered passengers to disembark from his car at knifepoint. They searched him and took his cellphone. Mbomboya wrestled the four accused persons as he screamed for help .- @waydenaido.