The Chronicle SWALLOWS FC continue to prove that anything Mamelodi Sundowns can do, they too can do after moving level on 21 points with the defending champions atop the 2020-21 DStv Premiership standings. Both Swallows and Sundowns won league titles in similar dramatic fashion last season. The Birds pipped Ajax Cape Town on goal difference to clinch the GladAfrica Championship crown and promotion back to South Africa’s top-flight, while Sundowns surpassed Kaizer Chiefs at the eleventh hour to retain their league trophy. After wins for Sundowns and Maritzburg United over Orlando Pirates and Bloemfontein Celtic in the first two games of 2021, Swallows were amongst six teams in action on Tuesday. The Soweto club continued from where they left off last year by beating Cape Town City 3-2 at Dobsonville Stadium.
Goals from Ruzaigh Gamildien (two) and Junaid Sait steered Swallows to a third straight win, in a thrilling clash in which Mduduzi Mdantsane also netted a brace while both teams ended the game with 10 men. There were supposed to be eight teams in action on Tuesday but the scheduled match between Lamontville Golden Arrows and Black Leopards had to be postponed due to a waterlogged pitch at Sugar Ray Xulu Stadium in Clermont. Elsewhere, Stellenbosch FC moved up to seventh spot on the league standings with a 2-0 win over Tshakhuma Tsha Madzivhandila at Danie Craven Stadium. Goals from Marc van Heerden and Phathutshedzo Nange guided the hosts to victory after Thabo Rakhale had missed a penalty for Vhadau Vha Damani, who dropped down to 12th as a result of the defeat. At Mbombela Stadium in Nelspruit, TS Galaxy fought back from two goals down to hold Baroka FC to a 2-2 draw. Bakgaga looked on course for all three points after goals from Ananias Gebhardt and Gerald Phiri Jr put them in total control, but the Rockets salvaged a point thanks to strikes from Shaune Mogaila and Mxolisi Machupu. Chippa United scored a late equaliser to hold SuperSport United to a 2-2 draw at Lucas Moripe Stadium in yesterday’s solitary fixture. Goals from Bradley Grobler and Thamsanqa Gabuza set SuperSport on course for victory following Andile Mbenyane’s opener but the Chilli Boys conjured a point in the pouring rain, courtesy of a Maloisane Mokhele goal with three minutes of regulation time remaining. — SuperSport