The Chronicle Chronicle Reporter
ZANU-PF has rubbished accusations by MDC Alliance vice-president Mr Tendai Biti that the Government is deliberately imprisoning opposition members as a way of “exterminating them” through exposure to Covid-19. Instead, the ruling party said concerted efforts were being made by Government to contain the pandemic. On Wednesday, Mr Biti tweeted that the Government should take full responsibility for the MDC Alliance spokesperson Fadzayi Mahere’s Covid-19 status. Ms Mahere has revealed that she tested positive to Covid-19. The opposition activist is facing a charge of communicating falsehoods. Ms Mahere was on Monday released on $10 000 bail and went to test for Covid-19 after claiming that prison authorities were not enforcing preventive measures in prisons. In a statement yesterday, Zanu-PF national spokesperson Ambassador Simon Khaya Moyo:
“The revolutionary party led by His Excellency the President and First Secretary Cde ED Mnangagwa wishes to reassure all Zimbabweans that concerted effort is being applied to contain Covid-10 pandemic which is now a global health menace. “The Covid-19 pandemic does not respect one’s age, status in life or political persuasions. So, for anyone to ascribe that the pandemic is targeting certain people of a political party is not only being mischievous, but rather being highly irresponsible.” Ambassador Khaya Moyo said contrary to Mr Biti’s ridiculous insinuations, Zanu-PF leadership is seized with continuously refining strategies meant to contain Covid-19. “It is unfortunate that politically immature characters like Tendai Biti have sought to derive political capital out of such an unfortunate health challenge bedevilling not only Zimbabwe, but the world at large. This deadly pandemic needs to be confronted with a united front,” he said. Ambassador Khaya Moyo urged Zimbabweans to adhere to the WHO and Ministry of Health and Child Care guidelines and protocols of masking up, sanitising, regular hand washing and social distancing. “The revolutionary party urges all patriotic Zimbabweans to spread the message of adherence to the WHO and Ministry of Health and Child Care protocols and guidelines to every corner of our nation. In the same vein, the party urges people in leadership positions thus traditional leaders, church leaders, opinion makers and civic organisations to join hands with Government in conscientising our people about the pandemic which is in our midst,” he said. Ambassador Khaya Moyo urged citizens to tackle Covid-19 head on and ignore Mr Biti’s reckless statements, saying they were a sign of ignorance, which all peace-loving Zimbabweans should dismiss with contempt. He urged citizens to take heed of the wise counsel by President Mnangagwa who has repeatedly called on Zimbabweans on every occasion to fight Covid-19 as one united family. “A war time approach needs to be applied in battling this deadly pandemic. That is indeed the way to go. We mourn all the dead who have succumbed to this pandemic and pray for divine intervention. The prayers and fasting called by the First Lady Amai Auxilia Mnangagwa constitute the tonic to this national challenge,” said Ambassador Khaya Moyo.