The Chronicle England completed a thrilling victory on day four of the second Test against Sri Lanka to take the series 2-0.
Chasing a tricky 164, England were 89-4 on a turning pitch but opener Dom Sibley hit 56 not out to lead them to a six-wicket win. Sibley, who had not reached double figures in the series, put on 75 with Jos Buttler, who made 46 not out. Earlier, England capitalised on reckless batting to dismiss Sri Lanka for 126 in their second innings. Dom Bess and Jack Leach took four wickets each and the hosts would have been dismissed even more cheaply but for 40 from number 10 Lasith Embuldeniya, who finished with match figures of 10-210. Resuming on 339-9 in their first innings, England conceded a first-innings deficit of 37 when Jack Leach was dismissed with only five runs added. Sri Lanka were favourites at that point but England completed a turnaround on a dramatic day when 15 wickets fell.
The series win is England’s fourth in a row and they are also unbeaten in 10 successive Tests under Joe Root’s captaincy, going into a difficult series in India which starts on 5 February. England are fourth in the World Test Championship table, 0.5% behind third-placed Australia. This was also England’s fifth consecutive away Test, the first time they have achieved that feat since World War One. They are developing an impressive winning habit. Sri Lanka’s batting, perhaps spooked by the turning pitch, was inept and their effort in the field lacklustre, but England were clinical. However, Sibley played the anchor role while Buttler provided impetus in his typically attacking style. Sibley, so at sea in his previous three innings, calmly nudged singles into the leg side. Buttler played thumped drives to the extra-cover boundary, smacked a reverse sweep through point and launched a slog sweep through mid-wicket. In the end, England won with ease, Sibley sealing a fine win by tapping for one.
Sri Lanka threatened better in this match, having been convincingly beaten by seven wickets in the first. They batted well in the first innings and in Embuldeniya they have a fine spinner, playing only his ninth Test. But their fourth-day performance was abysmal. Their batting was akin to their performance on day one of the series when they were bowled out for 135. The dismissals of captain Dinesh Chandimal – skying a slog sweep to Anderson at mid-on having hit a four a ball earlier – and Niroshan Dickwella, who drove Bess to extra cover two minutes before lunch, were the worst of a series of needlessly aggressive shots. Sri Lanka also disappointed in the field. They were a little unfortunate that Sibley survived three tight lbw reviews, all of which were umpire’s call, but their tactics were baffling. Chandimal set the field back and allowed an accumulator in Sibley to tick along as he wished. Bess and Leach bowled well – far better than their wicketless showing in the first innings – while James Anderson took a brilliant high catch and Zak Crawley two excellent grabs at short leg. Sri Lanka were leading only by 115 when their eighth wicket fell, before Embuldeniya, who had a remarkable game in defeat, dragged them to a score. The target looked competitive – the hosts were possibly even favourites – but the manner England in which overhauled it was mightily impressive. There was a wobble when Jonny Bairstow was trapped lbw for a useful 28-ball 29, Root – the dominant player in the series – was bowled for 11 and Dan Lawrence edged behind with a further 85 needed.