The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
THE National Arts Council of Zimbabwe (NACZ) has congratulated rapper Asaph for his nomination at the MTV Africa Music Awards (Mama) in the Listener’s Choice category saying this promotes the country’s arts industry. The Mambo hit-maker was this week announced as Zimbabwe’s representative at this year’s awards to be held on February 20 in Kampala, Uganda. The Mamas that will be hosted by acclaimed DJ Khaled will be broadcast on MTV Base (DStv Channel 322) and MTV (DStv Channel 130). The Bulawayo-based rapper will be vying for the gong with 19 other artistes from across the continent including Nigeria’s Tiwa Savage, Ghana’s Sarkodie and Focalistic, DJ Dinho and DBN Gogo from South Africa. Other nominees are Anna Joyce (Angola); Dagi D (Ethiopia), Didi B (Cote D’Ivoire); Drizilik (Sierra Leone); Khaligraph Jones (Kenya); Locko (Cameroon); Malome Vector (Lesotho); Meddy (Rwanda); Mohamed Ramadan (Egypt); Ngaaka Blindé (Senegal); Pallaso (Uganda); Rayvanny (Tanzania); Shirazee (Benin); Slick Stuart & DJ Roja (Uganda) and Souhila Ben Lachhab (Algeria). Voting has commenced on the MTV Africa website. Commenting on Asaph’s nomination, his first regional recognition, NACZ executive director, Nicholas Moyo said the nomination shows how hard Asaph has worked on his music career. “On behalf of the National Arts Council of Zimbabwe, I’d like to congratulate you on your nomination for this year’s MTV Africa Music Awards. This nomination in the Listeners’ Choice Category adds on to your other successes in the music industry. This on its own is testimony to the effort, diligence and dedication that you have put in your artistic works,” said Moyo. He said the rapper’s nomination had also raised the flag of Zimbabwean art. “As the NACZ, we are gratified that your exertion continues to raise the profile of your brand, music and the general arts industry of Bulawayo in particular and Zimbabwe as a whole.” The arts body’s director went on to wish Asaph good luck at the continental awards saying he hopes this recognition will propel his career. “It’s my humble submission that this continental recognition will propel your career to even greater success. Once again, congratulations on your achievement. We wish you the best of luck on the final lap of selection and in your future endeavours,” said Moyo. — @bonganinkunzi