The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
Rhumba band, Dubia Masters is gaining popularity with their latest album Amazwi kaPetro. The band fuses various music genres to come up with what they have termed ‘Dubia rhumba music.’ “We call our type of rhumba Isidubhia. It’s not tshova tshova or sungura, but we mix a number of genres like jazz, kwasa kwasa, gospel, sungura and tshova tshova to come up with isidubhia. Each time we record an album, we always put this type of music in order to maintain our diverse nature,” said one of the Dubia Masters members, Tumelo Kholwani Dube who is popularly known as TK. TK said they were humbled by the reception that their album which was released last month, is receiving. “Our seventh album is doing very well within the short period of its release. We’ve also managed to build our state-of-the-art sound equipment so this year is really promising.” Commenting on their album’s title, TK who has a spiritual mind said: “As a band, we’ve taken a decision to work for God and resolved that our album titles will have a gospel name. We want to use our music not only to entertain, but to preach the gospel. On this album, we’re urging people to never forsake the Lord,” said TK. On Amazwi kaPetro, the group outdid themselves by trying out the mbaqanga genre. Track eight on the album titled Bhukuje is sung in seTswana and has a mbaqanga beat. The song will likely remind some of the type of music sung by Mahlathini and the Mahotella queens. The track Awumazi Umuntu is proving popular as many are finding it hilarious due to it humorous storytelling on the history of how Tsholotsho, Jotsholo and Nkayi areas came about. Other tracks are Manana, Ndoboka a Kalanga song on which the artistes praise the communities which raised them, Ntshintsha ipassword and Uyeyisa. Dubia Masters is a joint venture between TK who hails from Gwambe area in Plumtree and Alfred Murembwa Sibanda from Gokwe. Commenting on their partnership, TK said it is unbreakable as they have so many things in common. Other than being a musician, TK is a producer who runs a record company, TK Recording Studios where many rhumba musicians are flocking to for outstanding rhumba beats. TK said he is overwhelmed by the support he is getting from fellow musicians. He said he received a stamp of approval from big rhumba guys like Mxolisi “Mr Bones” Ndlovu, Madalaboy and Charles Ndebele who recorded at his studio. Another rhumba great, Martin Sibanda also recorded his forthcoming album there. — @themkhust