The Chronicle The UK is ready for its “new start”, the government has said, as it prepares to leave EU trading rules at 11pm.
Officials insisted new border systems were “ready to go” amid concerns about possible delays. The trade deal agreed by the two sides avoids the need for import taxes — tariffs — which many firms had feared. But there will still be major changes to rules on travel, immigration, commerce, living and working abroad — as well as crime fighting and security. Fears of giant tailbacks of lorries at Dover — in the event of a no-deal exit from the EU single market and customs union — have receded, but uncertainty remains about new customs rules and the government has warned there will be “some disruption”. To reduce the risk of delays, the UK is phasing in checks on goods entering the country from the continent over a six-month period up to July 2021. But some new customs procedures will come into force on the UK-side immediately from 11pm, such as on imports of alcohol, tobacco, chemicals and controlled drugs. EU member states are introducing full customs declarations and other controls on UK exports from 11pm.
Among the other things that will change from 23:00 GMT: lFree movement of people between the UK and EU countries will end — to be replaced in the UK by a “points-based” immigration system. lAnyone from the UK who wants to stay in most of the EU for more than 90 days in any 180-day period will need a visa. lDuty-free shopping will return, with people coming back to the UK from the EU able to bring up to 42 litres of beer, 18 litres of wine, four litres of spirits and 200 cigarettes without paying tax. lEU citizens wanting to move to the UK (except those from the Irish Republic) will face the same points-based system as people elsewhere in the world. lUK police will lose instant access to EU-wide databases on criminal records, fingerprints and wanted persons. lTraders in England, Scotland and Wales will have to complete more paperwork when dealing with EU countries. Unlike the rest of the UK, Northern Ireland will continue to follow many of the EU’s rules, as its border with the Irish Republic remains all but invisible. And the UK will gradually be able to keep more of the fish caught in its own waters, while the European Court of Justice will cease to have any role in deciding disputes between the UK and EU. – BBC news