The Chronicle Harare Bureau
Farmers have put 185 557 hectares under the Cotton Presidential Inputs Scheme 2020/21 summer cropping season, representing a 28 percent increase from the 144 696 hectares planted during the same period last year. The latest crop update from the Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Water and Rural Resettlement shows that the target was 450 000 hectares. Statistics indicate that Midlands Province is leading with 93 654 hectares planted while Mashonaland Central has 32 357 hectares. Farmers in Masvingo planted 14 773 ha, Mashonaland West 10 429, Mashonaland East 10 730 ha and Manicaland 13 902 ha, Matabeleland North 8 768 ha and Matabeleland South 944 ha. Cotton Marketers and Growers Association of Zimbabwe national chairman Mr Stewart Mubonderi said the cotton was in good condition. “We received inputs on time. The only challenges are top dressing fertilisers, pesticides and herbicides. Due to the incessant rains, farmers cannot weed and require herbicides. “The bulk of the early planted crop is now at flowering stage. Few farmers are however, still planting with others replanting,” he said. Mr Mubonderi expressed concern that some cotton farmers were still to get their payments from last season. “We are appealing to authorities to ensure we get our money. Farmers are disappointed,” he said. Cottco chief executive, Mr Pious Manamike yesterday confirmed that the area put under cotton had increased and attributed it to prospects of a good season and the company’s initiatives to encourage farmers to continue despite payment challenges. “The Metrological Services Department gave a forecast of good rains. Optimism of normal to above normal rains motivated people to grow cotton this season. Last season, the rains were late and there was a drought which affected production. “This season we also convinced farmers to grow the crop. We had meetings with farmers on the ground to encourage them to continue producing cotton,” he said. Mr Manamike said farmers were owed $1,5 billion but indicated they were working towards paying all the farmers. Last season, Cottco had challenges paying farmers and ended up giving farmers groceries while those who wanted machinery got tractors with some getting scotch carts. The Presidential Inputs Support Scheme has revived the cotton industry which was on the verge of collapse due to low prices offered by merchants. Most farmers in cotton growing areas had abandoned the crop for others such as paprika, groundnuts and maize, while others left their fields fallow as they had no alternative crops suitable for their areas. Cotton is important because of its contribution to the textile industry, edible oil and stock feed manufacturing and also bringing in the much needed foreign currency.