The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Gwanda Correspondent
THE rising population in the mining town of Gwanda does not tally with the health facilities that are found in the capital of Matabeleland South Province. Gwanda has been fast growing over the years but has only Phakama Clinic and Gwanda Provincial Hospital as public health institutions. Many residents do not have the financial muscle to seek the services of a number of private players in the town’s health sector. The town has residents who stay in town and suburbs including Jacaranda, Jahunda, Geneva, Marriage, Phakama, Senondo, Ultra High, Spitzkop, Spitzkop Medium and Spitzkop North. This news crew observed during the week that scores of people queued at Phakama Clinic for hours, the same situation at the provincial hospital which is also a referral centre. Reads a notice by Gwanda Municipality dated January 20: “Municipality of Gwanda is intending to open a satellite clinic at Spitzkop Area. This will serve to decongest Phakama Clinic. We, therefore, invite house owners at Spitzkop Area who are able to offer a full house for lease to the Municipality to send he following information on the contact list given below. This invitation is valid until Thursday 28 January at 1600hrs. “Those interested should send the details via sms or WhatsApp as we continue to observe lockdown regulations. Only shortlisted bidders will be contacted for site visit.” In an interview, Gwanda mayor Councillor Njabulo Siziba said: “The congestion at Phakama Clinic is growing and this is due to the increase of numbers of population in the town. “The town is fast growing and there are nearby resettlements that also get their services at the clinic. We want to push for the satellite clinic before we built a clinic.” Residents who spoke to Chronicle said there is need for more clinics to be provided so that each resident enjoys their right to health that is enshrined in the Constitution. Mr Dumiso Hlongwane said with the current pandemic causing fatalities, availability of adequate health facilities is of paramount importance. “To me on the issue of Phakama Clinic, l will tend to differ with those who against Spitzkop Clinic. That move is very important in the community because there will be reduced distance for patients, employment creation because they have already applied for recruitment and definitely there will be decongestion at Phakama Clinic,” he said. Mr Hlongwane said construction of a satellite clinic will be a positive move provided the relevant authorities see it as an emergency project. “Overall as they are having cash challenges therefore it’s noble to have a satellite clinic than to start a new project where they will take ages to finish,” he added. A resident who spoke on condition of anonymity said: “Tents can also be used. Bulawayo City Council is also renting a house in Cowdray Park (Cowdray Park Clinic).” Efforts to get a comment from Matabeleland South provincial medical director Dr Chipo Chikodzere were fruitless. @mthabisi_mthire