The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
INKULULEKO Yabatsha School of Arts (Iyasa) director Nkululeko Dube says people need to start appreciating and supporting new artistes if the arts industry is to grow. Commenting on the just ended year, Dube said it was one full of promise, just like in 2000 when a number of artistes emerged. In 2000, the urban grooves pool of musicians was ushered in with a lot of actors, be it in theatre or television. Because of the various policies that were in place then among them the 75% local content, the artistes received a lot of support. Twenty years down the line, Dube feels it is time that happens again. To achieve this, he has urged established artistes and producers to pave way for fresh creatives. The seasoned arts administrator said the current crop of celebrated personalities must lead the way in terms of opening opportunities for the “thirsty” crop of young ones, the same way they enjoyed the limelight at the start of the millennium. He placed the year 2000 at heart as this was the time he managed to group up some school kids to be part of the now “larger than life” Iyasa troupe. “Now is the time for a new generation of talent, just like we did in 2000,” said Dube. Dube said the Covid-19 pandemic has shown the arts sector that giving leeway to fresh talent is the way to go, if the industry is to remain vibrant. “The start of 2020 was promising for a lot of artistes locally as most of them had potential and the zeal to be on billboards and everyone’s lips. It reminded me of 2000 when we had the magic number Y2K and positive energy flowed in everyone’s veins as many felt things would never be the same again. It was the same when we started 2020,” he said. However, he said there is a tendency in the arts industry of people not appreciating new talent, something he said needs to be corrected. “For growth, it is time we start to recognise other (new) artistes as there’s no way we’ll have the same stars always. That’s why we have arguments about South Africa or Harare being better, but those places are always churning out new stars because they give them support wholeheartedly. “This is the time to groom and let people make names. Let us grow new stars. We shouldn’t be hostile when we see new talent emerge as these (lack of support) are the things that make some people leave the arts,” he said. To ensure that new players get the support they need, Dube said there is now a serious need for symbiotic relations of promoters, artistes and media. Reflecting on 2020, Dube said artistes got to appreciate the power of the Internet as those who are based abroad and those in smaller towns, were finally recognised back home. “Suddenly we could see effectiveness from guys like Vusa Mkhaya, birth of Skhosana and Awa Khiwe among others through virtual platforms. We also saw a lot of young talent that’s bound to make it emerging,” he said. However, the outbreak of Covid-19 in the country last year, Dube said posed a challenge for many artistes as an unending lockdown was induced. This same lockdown however was good in that it saw artistes coming out of their shells and doing more in order to remain relevant. “When Covid-19 and the lockdown struck, we suddenly saw the power of online and social media. From March to May last year, people were taken aback and thought it was something that would come and go until they realised it was here to stay and was going to be the new normal for the creative sector. “Desire Moyoxide through his Eziko Theatre embraced the move by initiating an Ama2000 dance challenge online and as Iyasa, we adjusted the Credisi programme and ran it online. “Just like every artiste, we were pushed into a revolution and it is a revolution we didn’t understand firstly and are still trying to grapple around it,” he said. Dube said the online field was bitter-sweet as it had advantages and disadvantages. The advantages were that diasporans could now experience their home talent while for the latter, the local-based audiences had challenges securing enough online data to support their artistes. Looking at the new year, Dube said although it is encouraging to note that most artistes have embraced technology by sharing their works online, the issue of failing to monetise their works on virtual platforms remains a major stumbling block. Addressing this, Dube said should be on top of artistes New Year’s resolutions. “We still need these online platforms where we churn out talent and I am hoping that we’ll find a way to monetise these platforms for their growth as Covid-19 is not going anywhere anytime soon,” he said. Having identified and nurtured Sandra Ndebele, Dube said she should be an example for many artistes to see that they can redefine themselves and stand the test of time and still be regarded as the best. He said: “Another highlight of the year will be the coming of Ke Yona TV station. It’s my hope that artistes will not sleep on this opportunity and hit the ground running. They must use the station as a way of showing people what they’re all about because if they fail, they’ll be rejected.” Dube advised artistes that there is no point crying over a lost 2020 due to the pandemic but to use this year to focus on their goals. “The weak will fall and the strong will prosper and move the future,” he said. – @mthabisi_mthire.