The Chronicle Ricky Zililo Senior Sports Reporter
TANZANIA’s Simba SC’s free-loan request for Peter Muduhwa has divided the Highlanders executive committee, with three of the five members voting against the move. It has been clarified that Simba want Muduhwa on a six-month free loan, and not the four previously reported.
Bosso’s three executive committee members against a free loan deal argue that since Muduhwa signed a one-year deal with Highlanders and was paid in “hard currency”, the club has to get something from the short loan stint. They argue that if they let Muduhwa go, Highlanders could lose him for free as his contract will be left with six months and he can talk to any club. They insisted that Simba should make an offer. It also emerged that suggestions from the agent were that the Warriors’ defender will pay US$6 000 in monthly instalments of US$1 000 from his Simba earnings to Highlanders as the East Africans are adamant that they are keen on a free loan. If Highlanders agree to this kind of arrangement, which the majority of executive members are not comfortable with, it would mean after subtracting the signing-on fee they paid the player in December, the club would have loaned Muduhwa out for a mere US$2 000. The other two executive committee members say the player should be allowed to leave since he is going to compensate the club. Simba have enlisted the services of agent George Deda, who facilitated Prince Dube’s move to another Tanzanian side Azam, to mediate in the Muduhwa deal. In an interview from Dar-es-Salaam yesterday, Deda said: “What was agreed was that the player was going to earn enough money that goes with playing for a club like Simba. In that regard, part of his huge chunk would go to Highlanders. “All Highlanders executive (members) are aware (of all this). I have been talking to the secretary-general (Israel Moyo), vice-chairman (Modern Ngwenya) and CEO (Nhlanhla Dube) for the past four days.” Dube confirmed that Deda had reached out, but they were still waiting for official communication from Simba. “He (Deda) reached out with a proposal he said was there and I forwarded it to the executive for deliberations,” said Dube. Chronicle Sport has it on good authority that Nkana Red Devils of Zambia had tabled a US$9 000 six-month loan deal for Muduhwa and Highlanders is waiting for the player to negotiate his personal terms. — @ZililoR