The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
THE media needs to complement Government’s efforts to disseminate information on measures meant to curb the spread of Covid-19 as the effects of the pandemic will shape business and consumer behaviour for a long time to come. Social distancing, quarantining and staying home have had significant effects on media consumption. Deputy director in the Ministry of Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services and a member of the National Risk Communication team from the Covid-19 National Command Centre, Retired Major Leonard Tarwirei yesterday said the media played a pivotal role in shaping society even in the aftermath of the pandemic that has killed more than two million people worldwide. In an interview after touring 95.8 FM (Central Radio Station) in Gweru, Rtd Major Tarwirei said the media as the Fourth Estate is critical in the fight against Covid-19. He said the media, both public and private, should complement Government’s efforts to fight the pandemic by informing, educating and entertaining the nation with programmes that are aimed at fighting the scourge. “We are with the Risk Management Communication team from the National Command Centre which is visiting Gweru, Bulawayo and Victoria Falls mainly for the purpose of analysing and assessing the efforts by media houses in complementing Government efforts in terms of the campaigns to inform the public about the pandemic,” said Rtd Major Tarwirei. He said the team was visiting broadcasting stations and community newspapers in the three cities. “After our visit we will then inform the National Command Centre of the challenges the media houses are facing which might be impeding their efforts to disseminate information aimed at encouraging members of the public to change behaviour. We will also find out how Government can assist in that regard,” said Rtd Major Tarwirei. He said behaviour change by citizens was vital if individuals from family level were to adhere to the strict Covid-19 regulations meant to curb the spread of the pandemic. The 95.8 FM station manager Mr Dumisani Sibanda said they complement Government efforts through programming which includes- five minutes every hour of Covid-19 messages and statistics. He said the presenters every hour play jingles, songs or relay messages on Covid-19. “We play jingles and full-length songs on Covid-19. We also have messages from pastors, musicians and celebrities. We also have messages from political parties’ representatives on the virus because Covid- 19 knows no political boundaries,” said Mr Sibanda. He said the station was campaigning vigorously for citizens to change behaviour and strictly adhere to Covid-19 regulations. Mr Sibanda said Gweru citizens were deliberately flouting the Covid-19 regulations thereby exposing themselves to the pandemic.