The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
BASKETBALL Union of Zimbabwe president Joe Mujuru said they’re disappointed that all sporting activities have again been suspended by tightened lockdown restrictions. The Government announced tightened lockdown restrictions on Saturday night after a spike in Covid-19 infections. Following the Government’s revision of lockdown restrictions, the Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC) said all sporting activities in Zimbabwe have been put on hold until January 31. The SRC further stated that any exceptions will be dealt with on a case-by-case basis. “We understand that there are complications but coming from a background where we have not had sporting events for more than 10 months, having another ban is obviously disappointing. We are already lagging behind in terms of development and growth. This is a year of senior qualifiers and continental championships that we were hoping we will be part of, but it seems that will not be happening,” said Mujuru. “This whole situation will have a negative impact on the strength of our local leagues as well as the national team. We hope this lockdown will be short. We must learn collectively as the sporting fraternity to live with this virus because what is clear is that it will not be going anywhere. It’s a challenge to all sporting people to think outside the box and see how we can live in the same space with this virus otherwise to wait for the virus to end will not happen. A solution is needed on how we can play safe sport in the midst of the virus.” His sentiments were echoed by Bulawayo Volleyball Association (BVA) chairperson William Mazviro, who said the latest lockdown restrictions were painful for the growth of the sport. “What is needed now is a permanent solution to how sport can progress in this situation. For a sport like volleyball, we are now going into the second year without any action and this has certainly affected, not only the sport in general, but junior development as well. Now work towards recovery is needed, good approaches are needed to rectify the situation,” Mazviro said. Bulawayo Athletics Board (Bab) chairperson Watson Madanyika said: “All our events are cancelled until further notice because of the new directive from the SRC. Obviously, we are disappointed, but then safety should always come first. It is frustrating for athletes that were looking forward to taking part in the events that we had lined up.”