The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent GOSPEL musician, Sipho “Snowy” Ncube describes his nomination at the Zimbabwe Music Awards in the Best Traditional Gospel award as God showing him that nothing is impossible. Snowy is up against Mambo Dhuterere, Vusa Mangena and Kea Love in the Best Traditional Gospel category. The awards will be held on February 20. Snowy, real name Siphosenkosi Ncube, who last year launched his DVD album Uyisagila Sami, said he did not think he would make the cut. “Honestly, I wasn’t expecting to be nominated at all but one thing I have learnt is that God is a God of the impossible. I’m very excited about being nominated and recognised in the national standards of music and this shows that we can make it even at international level,” said Snowy. The Harvest House International Church (HHIC) exponent gave praise to God. “Above all Glory to GOD. I believe with more effort there’s room to be nominated at different platforms, locally and internationally. I managed to release the DVD Uyisagila Sami in 2020 when things were tough and to me this shows God was on my side,” said Snowy. The former Njube High School pupil is enrolled at the Hillside Teachers’ College in Bulawayo where he is studying music and is in his second year. At the Zimas, there are two gospel categories, Best Traditional that Snowy is in and Best Contemporary. According to the Zima rule book, Traditional Gospel is for artistes who perform traditional/roots music and may include folk music from the various language groups of Zimbabwe. This category is also for artistes who perform music that is mainly dominated by vocal rendition, which may be accompanied by clap and tap, feet stomping and other genre-specific percussive sounds such as woodblocks, cowbells, traditional wind instruments and traditional drums. Guitars, keyboards, and other rhythm section instruments usually used for chord progression are generally excluded from this genre. Best Contemporary is for artistes who perform contemporary faith-based music influenced by contemporary music styles. Musically, it follows the trends in secular contemporary music. There are no language exclusions in this category. — Follow on Twitter @bonganinkunzi