The Chronicle Fungai Muderere, Senior Sports Reporter
FC Platinum goalminder and captain Petros Mhari shared a video of himself enjoying Lovemore Majaivana’s “Khala Ntandane” song from his hotel room in Dar es Salaam where he’s in quarantine after testing positive for Covid-19 last week. Mhari and five of his teammates, midfielder Ransom Pavari, defender Lawrence Mhlanga, striker Silas Songani and Congolese national Eli Ilunga were sequestered at a hotel in Tanzania after testing positive for Covid-19 ahead of their Caf Champions League game against Simba SC last week. The five did not play in the encounter as a result of the positive results. Speaking from his hotel room, the flamboyant goalkeeper says Majaivana has always inspired him to “always seek to do better”. Having lived in Zvishavane and Hwange, among other places, few would expect him to be this charmed by Majaivana’s music. And yet Mhari is and has been a big fan of the US-based Majaivana for a long time. “I’m a big fan of Lovemore Majaivana. I’m so much into his songs, especially the song Khala Ntandane. His musical lyrics always serve as an inspiration to me to do better every time. Majaivana’s music has been part of my therapy because sometimes you need to listen to music that you like so much to uplift your spirit,” said Mhari. “It has been a challenging experience and uncertainty and anxiety has got the better of me, but I have been using music to deal with the emotional baggage that comes with testing positive for an illness like Covid-19 as well as being quarantined.” While Mhari remains quarantined in Tanzania, Mhlanga returned home on Tuesday and told Chronicle Sport how homesick he was. “I prayed hard daily asking for divine intervention. I missed home so much. There was so much boredom and I really missed being at my home and being with my close associates,” Mhlanga said. In spite of the negative stigma associated with people that test positive for Covid-19, both superstars said they would “care less about the stigma because life is more precious than anything else”.