The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili/Bongani Ndlovu, Chronicle Reporters
FOUR out of more than 200 people who were evacuated in Manicaland ahead of a tropical depression at the weekend have tested positive for Covid-19. The Department of Civil Protection Unit (CPU), evacuated 267 people and tested them for Covid-19. The weather event, classified as a tropical storm at first before being upgraded into a cyclone Friday and downgraded into a tropical depression yesterday killed three people in Manicaland on Saturday after they were swept away by flooded rivers, while schools have been damaged and hundreds displaced following heavy rains and strong winds that hit Zimbabwe over the weekend. The depression hit some parts of the country including Manicaland and Matabeleland South and has exited into Botswana and South Africa. CPU director, Mr Nathan Nkomo said: “As at 23 January 2021, a total number of 267 people were evacuated as follows: Lydia Chimonyo School (39), Mutambara School (74) and Nyanyadzi High School (61).” Those found to be Covid-19 positive through the Rapid Test at Mutambara evacuation centre are isolated at the local hospital. “The Covid-19 test is also being conducted at the rest of the above-mentioned evacuation centres,” said Mr Nkomo. Heavy downpours were received in Nyanga with 97mm over 24-hours, Chipinge 62mm, Buffalo Range 50mm, Mutare 45mm and Beitbridge 40mm. Some of the areas that experienced flooding include Chimanimani, Chiredzi, Zaka, Bikita and Mwenezi as they were in the path of the depression. As a result of the heavy rains the Tugwi-Mukosi dam in Masvingo according to Zimbabwe National Water Authority is spilling. In Chipinge district, there are fears that dams such as Watershed, Bangazzan and Mutakura could spill and cause flooding downstream. Mr Nkomo said in Matabeleland South, Mashonaland Central and Mashonaland East there was no flooding, but they were monitoring flood-prone areas in the respective provinces. He urged the public to stay indoors where possible, keep updated and take due precaution during such weather phenomenon. “The District Civil Protection Committees from the affected provinces are currently assessing the extent of damage and needs of the affected people. The situation in the rest of the provinces not reported here is calm. The Department of Civil Protection will continue to give updates as necessary,” said Mr Nkomo. The Meteorological Service Department (MSD) yesterday warned the public that while the depression might have exited the country, flooding remains a possibility. MSD head of forecasting Mr James Ngoma said heavy rains led to dams spilling, warning downstream communities to be on alert as flooding incidents are still possible. “This the final update on Tropical Cyclone Eloise, that swept on the south-eastern of Zimbabwe Saturday 23 January has now degraded into a low-pressure system. Today Sunday, the centre of the low-pressure system is in the west of Beitbridge area, along its path it dumped a lot of moisture bringing heavy rains and strong winds over the eastern and southern parts of Zimbabwe,” said Mr Ngoma. “We expect it to exit Zimbabwe moving further southwest into South Africa and Botswana today (yesterday). For Zimbabwe for the rest of today we however, received few localised heavy falls into the southeast of Zimbabwe. Because of this falls moisture which is in the southwest Matabeleland South we are still expecting rains in excess of 30mm and therefore we still want to advise the general public to take due precaution since we have been receiving these heavy downpours, there is high likelihood of downstream effects and we still advise you not to cross flooded rivers.” He urged motorists to be extremely cautious on the roads as the rains could result in the roads being slippery while trees and electricity poles can fall.- @nqotshili/bonganinkunzi