The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent FEMALE comedian Nomsa “MsDee” Muleya who, like many artistes, was adversely affected by economic disruptions of Covid-19, was at one time forced to move back to stay with her mother. Last year, most artistes were not active because of the lockdown restrictions and as such have been finding the going tough. Musicians were forced to stage online shows but unfortunate comedians like MsDee were totally grounded. When things were normal, besides comedy shows, comedians such as MsDee were hired as MCs at parties and weddings. The outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic closed all avenues for some artistes as gatherings are banned and as such there are no parties or weddings to talk about. MsDee said because of the challenges brought about by the economic disruptions of the pandemic, she was left with no option but to move out of her lodgings and return to her parents. “I still have outstanding bills because there wasn’t any income last year. My mother had to come through for me especially towards the last part of last year as I moved back with her for about two months. “It was only in December that I managed to get back on my feet and I’m back at my place. It’s still tough, but life must go on,” said MsDee. MsDee, one of the first female comedians to break the barriers, said she had to think fast and explore her other talents. She decided to teach herself how to do manicure. “Around October last year, I started doing nails and my first client’s nails fell off the following day. Luckily, she didn’t request a refund and laughed at me instead. I’m now perfecting the skill. “Covid has been an eye opener that as artistes, we need skills outside our art. I realised that if your one form of survival is crippled and you have nothing else to fall back on, you’ll have problems. Everyone is going through challenges, so you can’t expect anyone to help even if they are there. Also, for how long can they assist? I’m sure most artistes are facing these challenges,” said MsDee. The comedian said the lockdown restrictions have also separated her from her son who is locked up in South Africa where he is studying. “Covid regulations and borders being closed, keep preventing us from seeing each other. However, I’m thankful we’re both alive during this crisis,” she said. Turning to her arts career, she said she is looking forward to hosting her first gig after lockdown. “Let’s come out of this alive and have mature comedy. It hasn’t been easy being under lockdown but there’s been stuff to laugh about,” said MsDee.