The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Chronicle Reporter
HOME Affairs and Cultural Heritage Minister Cde Kazembe Kazembe has expressed concern over the flouting of Covid-19 regulations by businesses which are banned from operating under the lockdown measures pronounced by Government. In a Press statement yesterday, Cde Kazembe said police will hunt down those who defy the law as they risk losing their licences. “My Ministry is concerned with bars, night clubs, restaurants, and other business entities who are operating yet according to Statutory Instrument 10 of 2021, these are banned. I have directed the Commissioner General of Police to ensure that the law takes its course on any individual, syndicate or business entity contravening Covid-19 regulations. There is no need for anyone to grandstand. In the same vein, I plead with public figures/ musicians and others to lead by example in fighting this pandemic,” he said. Cde Kazembe also castigated the hosting of wild parties which have become super spreaders of the deadly virus. He said police will be deployed to all areas and anyone found on the wrong side of the law will pay the price. “I am equally disturbed by some shopping centres in some areas in the country which are now known for wild parties, beer drinking binges and all sorts of illegalities. This should stop forthwith. Police officers will move around all suburbs, shopping centres and even check houses to account for transgressions against Covid regulations and other criminal activities. “I urge the public to report to any nearest police station, individuals or groups holding parties or musical events or any other gatherings not sanctioned under Covid-19 regulations. Organisers of such events will face the wrath of the law and risk losing their licences,” he said. The minister said some members of the public were also not abiding by regulations which limit funeral attendees to 30 people. He said the country can only overcome the virus if people follow level four regulations announced by the Vice President and Minister of Health and Child Care, Dr Constantino Chiwenga. “As a nation, we can only curb this pandemic if we are united, committed and being law abiding citizens. It is a fact that Covid-19 is affecting everyone. It knows no colour, creed, boundary or status. Let us take it serious and adopt the new normal in order to promote health and the maintenance of law and order in the country,” he said. Cde Kazembe also condemned acts of misconduct by police officers during the lockdown and the smashing of windows for illegal pirating kombis by police. “My ministry strongly condemns acts of misconduct by police officers which tarnish the image of the Government and the Police in particular. The widely circulated social media clip of a police officer who allegedly struck a baby with a baton stick in Harare on 4th January 2021 is a cause for concern. My Ministry does not condone the smashing of vehicle windscreens or windows by police officers. The Commissioner General of Police has assured me that this message will be cascaded to all Police Commanders for the conscientisation of their members,” he said. He also warned social media activists to be responsible and verify facts before jumping to conclusions following the circulation of a video of a policeman who allegedly hit a baby with claims that the child had died yet in actual fact the baby was still alive and was not beaten by the cop. He said security agents are there to enforce regulations while it is the responsibility of citizens to stop the spread of the pandemic. — @themkhust