The Chronicle Joel Tsvakwi, Showbiz Correspondent
SOUTH Africa-based rapper, producer and filmmaker Mc Tytoh (real name Titus Marume) wants to ensure he keeps the hip hop genre in Zimbabwe alive and relevant by producing music that will appeal to diverse listeners. Mc Tytoh recently released a 13-track underground Hip-Hop album titled Lyri-season which he says has songs for different people. He said he ventured into the world of underground hip hop in order to keep hip hop alive. Underground Hip-Hop is an umbrella term for Hip hop music outside the general commercial canon. It is typically associated with independent artists. The genre is often characterised by socially conscious, positive or anti-commercial lyrics. “There have been a lot of grievances from Hip Hop fans and the mature old school crowd who have all come to the conclusion that Hip Hop is dead. They say they miss listening to music with substance because the hip hop industry is flooded with alternative Hip-Hop that’s made purely for entertainment. Due to these concerns, I’ve decided to silence those claims by producing music that I’m confident will appeal to these people who’re losing hope in the genre,” Mc Tytoh said. The 39-year-old artist described his latest offering as an honest piece of hard work and says he is one of the oldest active members of the Zim Hip-Hop community. “On this album I poured my heart out on each and every song on matters that range from love, betrayal, heartbreaks, grief and politics,” he said. The album was produced by Elemental force, Australia based King Krued, Viper beatz and Mc Tytoh who mixed and mastered the whole project. Mc Tytoh said fans should look out for another album that he is hoping to release at the end of this month. “I’ve another album which will be released at the end of this month. I’m also shooting eight videos from the Lyriseason album. I’ve since started working on what will be my biggest project of all time which I’ll drop on July 7 to celebrate my 40th birthday,” he said.