The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
ZIMBABWE Cricket (ZC) fitness trainers have released programme to be followed by players during the lockdown in preparation for their upcoming bio-secure bubble matches. ZC organised regional men’s and women’s competitions that will see games being played across all formats in a bio-secure bubble environment as part of preparations for the upcoming international assignments against Pakistan and Afghanistan. Tuskers administrator Nick Singo said while waiting for ZC to complete setting up the Northern and Southern Region teams, cricketers are expected to keep themselves busy at home. The association has applied to the Sports and Recreation Commission for a waiver to fulfil these fixtures. “Covid-19 has made things difficult and as we wait for ZC to give us direction on the establishment of Northern and Southern Region teams ahead of next month’s engagements, we expect cricketers to follow training programmes issued by fitness coaches. This has been done so that when they head for the bio-secure bubble they are in good shape,” Singo said. Zimbabwe national team batting coach Stuart Matsikenyeri was named the Northerns men head coach and is being assisted by Eric Chauluka. Other members of the Northerns’ technical staff are Stanley Chioza (fielding coach), Njabulo Ncube (bowling coach), Walter Karimanzira (fitness coach) and Travor Wambe (physiotherapist). Southerns will be led by national team bowling coach Douglas Hondo as head coach, with Mufaro Chiturumani as assistant coach. Shepherd Makunura (fielding coach), Walter Chawaguta (batting coach), Walter Karimanzira (fitness trainer) and Travor Wambe (physiotherapist) complete the Southerns’ technical set-up. The Northern and Southern region clashes will afford selectors an opportunity to pick players for the national teams. The Zimbabwe senior men’s national team is set to tour Afghanistan next month for two Tests and three T20 Internationals while the women’s side is expected to host Pakistan in Harare. Zimbabwe and Afghanistan are yet to agree on the finer details of the tour which is likely to take place in Oman. – @ZililoR