The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
MULTI-award-winning rapper Asaph believed he had a good chance in representing Zimbabwe at the MTV Africa Music Awards (MAMAs) Lister’s Choice Category saying nothing is impossible in bagging the continental gong. Asaph was yesterday announced as Zimbabwe’s representative at this year’s awards to be held on February 20 in Kampala, Uganda. The MAMAs will be broadcast on MTV Base (DStv Channel 322) and MTV (DStv Channel 130). The Bulawayo based rapper will now vie for the Listeners Choice gong with 19 other artistes from across the continent such as Nigeria’s Tiwa Savage, Ghana’s Sarkodie; Focalistic and DBN Gogo both from South Africa. Voting has commenced on the MTV Africa website. In representing Zimbabwe, Asaph pipped big names such as Zimdancehall kingpin Winky D, multi-award-winning Jah Prayzah, BET winner Amapiano queen ShaSha and songstress Gemma Griffiths. Voting for the artistes was done on Twitter by their fans and listeners of ZiFM Stereo, with final deliberations being done by MTV Africa Music Awards. The Like So hit-maker who recently celebrated his 29th birthday, said although he was up against big names, he was optimistic that he would represent the country well at the MAMAs. “This is big for me as an artiste, because the other artistes are big and they have been playing on MTV. The campaign that we put for my votes was pretty intense. It was 50/50; I was feeling anything was possible. This means that I’m now on the African stage, it means the only way is up right now,” said Asaph. Real name Tafadzwa Tarukwana, Asaph said this showed him that there was no need for artistes to move to Harare to make it big in Zimbabwe or Africa or the world. “I used to have that idea that I have to move to Harare to make it in the industry. But I feel with this I’m going straight to Africa. Hopefully this will inspire someone that from wherever you are you can make it work. Whether you are in Tsholotsho or Luveve, Cowdray Park or Vic Falls we can do it,” said Asaph. From the nominees he is now up against, Asaph said he would like to collaborate with Nigeria’s Tiwa Savage and Focalistic. Asaph said this year he will release more music and hopefully with this nomination his music will be played more on MTV. “I’m looking forward to more music and music videos. Now that I have got this MTV link, I’m sure they’ll be playing my stuff now. Hopefully get a lot of international and regional features,” said Asaph. Last year, Asaph was busy as he has worked with multiple local singers such as Nutty O, Gemma Griffiths in the song 263 and Msiz’kay on the track Aspheli Moya both which topped charts alongside Like So that was given rotation on MTV. He is also behind hits such as Mambo that topped charts in 2018 and has bagged gongs in Zim Hip Hop Awards and Roil Bulawayo Arts Awards. _@bonganinkunzi