The Chronicle Ngqwele Dube, Sports Correspondent
HIGHLANDERS members should consider electing younger members into the executive as a way of grooming future leaders and ensuring the club continues to rejuvenate itself. Bosso are due to hold elections on February 7 for executive committee posts of chairman, secretary and committee member. Some members feel there is no grooming of young members, with the few young people taking part in the elections usually being rejected by the ageing membership. This call was also made by prominent South Africa-based businessman Mthandazo Peter Moyo in 2015 when he addressed a fundraiser organised by the club. He urged Bosso to embrace and invest in the youths, both on and off the field. Bosso member, Lindani “Khabazela” Hadebe (40) said it was time younger people were elected into office, as it was imperative for the club’s regeneration. “I feel the election is giving us (Highlanders members) an opportunity to rejuvenate ourselves. Look at where we are going in terms of having younger members in office. “We cannot continually be learning from outside, but having someone within will ensure they learn and impart knowledge to their age mates, while preparing for future leadership roles within the club,” Hadebe said. He said it was critical to set up general subcommittees for Highlanders’ members rather than just within the board and executive, so that more members can be groomed from there. Another Bosso member Innocent “Bra Nox” Mikazhu (36) said living in a fast-paced world with continual technological changes means younger people should be part of the top echelons of the club. He said a younger leader easily relates with younger supporters and can ensure they are in line with club programmes and objectives. “I believe a mix of old and young in the executive can change the dynamics of the club. “As a young supporter, I believe another young person can easily engage those who usually sit at the Soweto stand and bring them into line with the club’s objectives and vision, unlike elders who struggle with the language used. We also need more younger members and a young leader can play a leading role in recruiting them,” said Mikazhu. When Moyo highlighted the issue in August 2015, Highlanders had rejected the candidatures of Faith Silandulo Dube and Innocent Batsani Ncube, who were in their mid-30s at the time. Moyo pointed out that former Bosso chairman and current club president Ndumiso Gumede was given the reins when he was in his mid-30s and he managed to steer the club well, acquiring properties that included the club offices, clubhouse and a property in Luveve. The youngest among confirmed candidates for this year is 45-year-old Bheka Sibanda, who is expected to take on Mgcini Mafu (52) for the committee member post.