The Chronicle Harare Bureau
It appears the euphoria that traditionally characterised the year-end “shutdown” radio charts is slowly dying if last year’s chart shows across various radio and television stations is anything to go by. In previous years, such shows were much anticipated with participation by listeners usually over the top. Due to this popularity, corporates would stampede to sponsor cash prizes and various packages to winners, but it seems the dynamics have changed. Could this be due to the detrimental effects of the Covid-19 pandemic on companies’ productivity or the general realisation by the corporate world that the followership of these radio shows has dwindled? It’s just over a week after the shutdown chart shows, but there has been a deafening silence from music critics, listeners and music stakeholders in sharp contrast with the traditional debates that characterised the aftermath of these chart shows. Past years, fans and musicians would still be debating about the results up to now, but it seems this is no longer the case. Radio producers, librarians and personnel from most stations said there was a significant drop in listeners’ participation in chart shows. “Honestly, last year, listeners didn’t respond like they did in previous years. Our voting platforms were not as busy as we had become used to. This was due to a combination of factors, one being that most listeners find buying data or airtime for voting as a luxury. They would rather buy bread or something else in these tough Covid-19 days,” said one producer with a popular radio station. However, an inside source within National FM had a different tale to tell. “Our voting platforms were saturated and our phone lines were inundated with calls of listeners wanting to participate in the chart show where Prophet T Freddy amassed the most votes,” he said. In the same chart show, Jah Prayzah, Winky D, Freeman and Mambo Dhuterere proved their mettle as they made top five. National FM’s forte is sungura music but three Zimdancehall artistes made it in the top 10. These were Freeman (2), Winky D (4) and Killer T on seventh position with 5 521 votes. Star FM proved to be a favourite for the urbanites as the majority of the songs were Zimdancehall and South African house and Amapiano tracks. Zimdancehall duo Poptain and Allanah topped the hit list with their song Fadza Mutengi which dominated all radio stations including those perceived as being “reserved” for sungura. After all the noise and praises throughout the year, Mark Ngwazi occupied the pole position on Radio Zimbabwe with his hit song Taurai Madzoka ahead of Mambo Dhuterere’s Kubata basa and Jah Prayzah and Jah Master who followed with Donhodzo and Hello Mwari respectively. Notably, Jah Prayzah’ song Donhodzo appears to have been one of the most popular songs as it appeared in the top 10 of almost every radio station. Dendera kingpin Sulumani Chimbetu, pulled a shocker when his recently released jam Bvuma Kusara, performed extremely well to snatch fourth position on ZBC Top 50 videos, trailing Jah Prayzah’s Munyaradzi, Winky D’s new release Reply and Mathias Mhere’s Nhoroondo. Gospel diva Janet Manyowa was the most consistent gospel artiste as she maintained decent positions on all charts competing with secular musicians. Local listeners however, showed no love for Nox Guni’s sizzling collaboration with Master KG, My Melody. The song that is much sought after across the Limpopo only managed to make position 20 on Radio Zimbabwe’s chart. On ZBC Top 50, it was on position 33 while on Star FM it stood on number 46.