The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Acting Business Editor
THE Bulawayo Chamber of Small-to-Medium Enterprises (SMEs) is collaborating with Government to enforce compliance to lockdown rules while facilitating smooth running of operations by registered members in the manufacturing sub-sector. Zimbabwe embarked on its second national lockdown Tuesday this week to run over 30 days following a surge in the number of Covid-19 cases. The country has since the outbreak of the disease in March last year recorded over 15 000 cases and nearly 400 deaths. On March 30, 2020, the Government embarked on a 21-day national lockdown which was extended by 14 days with a view of containing the spread of the health crisis. Under the second lockdown, employers with businesses classified as essential service such as the manufacturing sub-sector, are required to issue workers exemption letters accompanied by the parent ministry’s exemption letters.
Bulawayo Chamber of SMEs chairperson Mr Energy Majazi said: “We’ve done almost everything that is expected of us, we have also complied with the national lockdown guidelines in the sense that, we have not authorised non-essential businesses registered under the chamber to operate during the lockdown period.” He said the SMEs chamber was aware that their members that do not fall under the essential service category would be negatively affected by the lockdown. “But we are trying to work round the clock to ensure that those members who fall under the manufacturing sub-sector are allowed to operate. “We are working with our parent Ministry to ensure registered SMEs within the manufacturing sub-sector are allowed access to their factories and the police have actually indicated that they will be involved and we’re working with them as well,” said Mr Majazi, adding that relevant authorities were verifying the information which the chamber was providing them with. The chamber’s boss could not be drawn into ascertaining the exact figure of their members registered under the manufacturing sub-sector as he did not have the statistics off-hand. “As an organisation, we are informing the Government through our parent Ministry or law enforcement agents that these people that we are vouching for, are genuine members of the chamber involved in manufacturing,” he said. To promote hygiene among the workforce, the Government has declared that employees are encouraged to have a pocket size sanitiser and mask up at all times. In addition, employers are expected to assist staff with travel arrangements in order to decongest public transport. “In terms of compliance to the Covid-19 regulations, we are on top of the situation; even at entry points when you enter our complexes there is a check point to check body temperature and sanitising,” said Mr Majazi. Taking into account the critical role SMEs play in sustaining the economy, a market analyst Mr George Nhepera urged players in the sector to embrace digital platforms to promote survival particularly during this era of the Covid-19 pandemic. “This is the time to fully embrace technologies and digital transformations by companies operating in the informal sector, for the whole world has reached a junction of no return to the old normal system. “It’s time to be innovative and progressive in our decision making process for the good of our companies to remain in business,” he said. Meanwhile, health experts project there could be an extension of the current lockdown if people deviate from recommended guidelines meant to stop the spread of the respiratory infection. — @okazunga