The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Gwanda Correspondent
A GERMANY based organisation, , has intensified its drive to empower women and children living with albinism in Matabeleland South Province. This comes after the successful implementation of the Christmas gift campaign in late December where hundreds of vulnerable children including those living with albinism in Zvishavane, Mbare and Goromonzi received grocery hampers. The campaign, which was dubbed “A Gift for Christmas” saw a number of under-privileged members of society benefit. Spearheaded by founder of the organisation Mrs Samantha Gumbo, the community outreach programme ensured that vulnerable women and children meet daily upkeep challenges during the ended festive season. The highlight of the organisation’s works which have been commended by the Government, are economic programmes that have resulted in many women honing skills in baking, cooking, events management and sewing. In an interview from her base in Germany, Mrs Gumbo said over 200 children benefitted from the programme and for 2021 focus will be on the Matabeleland South Province. “The total of children we had were 235. 100 were from Zvishavane where I grew up, 100 children were from Mbare and 35 were from an orphanage in Goromonzi,” she said. “After searching for months prior, we managed to get contributions that covered enough to buy hampers. The groceries were bought in South Africa so we maximise on quantities. “Each hamper included 2kg rice, 1kg salt, 2kg sugar, 2 litres cooking oil, 100ml tomato sauce, 250g tea bags, 1kg sunlight washing powder, sunlight green bar, 100ml colgate, 10 boxes of matches, 2kg flour, 2 tissue rolls, 500g cremora, 450g fruit jam, 750g salad cream, a 500g pack of beans, 10kg roller meal, a 500g pack of chunks, 2 litres Oros drink, 800g peanut butter, sanitary pads, instant porridge, chips and sweets.” Mrs Gumbo said they also rolled out lotions to albinos and their target for the year is to assist Matabeleland South Province with the albino community also a target for beneficiaries in light of the scorching sun in the rainbow province. She said in the province they will also look at the plight of children who lost their mothers at birth. “Currently because there are many children that are being dumped as well as losing mothers at birth, we have a 2021 drive to get milk Nan 1 and Nan 2 (or alternative) as well as nappies or diapers. “The project is annual and this year we are covering more areas. We started with Harare only and I would like to spread it to Matabeleland South province taking note that I once learnt at Empandeni Mission. “ I need to assist areas that have had an impact in my life. We also want to include Gweru in Midlands province as well this year,” said Mrs Gumbo. −@mthabisi_mthire.