The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter ZIMBABWE is expected to start the feeling the impact of Tropical Storm Eloise on Friday evening in Manicaland before it spreads to Matabeleland South and Masvingo tomorrow and on Sunday. Destructive rains and strong winds are expected as Tropical Storm Eloise sweeps in some parts of the country. Heavy rains in excess of 50 milimetres (50mm) are anticipated within 24 hours in mentioned provinces. In a statement on Thursday night, MSD said the Tropical Storm Eloise in the Mozambican Channel is expected to make a landfall near Beira during the early hours tomorrow. The weather forecaster said the country’s eastern highlands are expected to start feeling the impact of the developing weather system by tonight. “Moderate Tropical Storm Eloise is currently in the northern part of the Mozambique Channel, a position that draws moisture from the southern parts of Zimbabwe. While Eloise is in the warm waters of the channel it is expected to intensify and track south-westward before making landfall near Beira, Mozambique early Saturday morning January 23 2021,” read MSD statement. It said Zimbabwe is expected to receive destructive rains in the path of the Tropical Storm Eloise. “Rains associated with the cloud bands of the Tropical System Eloise should start of on the southern parts of Manicaland province as early as Friday evening 22 January 2021. By Saturday heavy rains (in excess of 50 milimetres (mm)) are expected over Manicaland and southern parts of Masvingo, spreading into the southern parts of Matabeleland South province by Sunday 24 January 2021,” reads the advisory. MSD warned as a result of the heavy rains huts, houses, utility poles and trees or branches could collapse. It also said the country expected to experience localised flashfloods and destructive rains. The Civil Protection Unit has reiterated that its structures that were activated in December in anticipation of Cyclone Chalane remain active to handle rain related disasters. On Friday morning, Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Permanent Secretary Mr Nick Mangwana said Government triggered evacuation response in Manicaland’s Chipinge and Chimanimani districts. “The CPU committees have set up evacuation centres and sent out alert messages,” tweeted Mr Mangwana. – -@nqotshili