The Chronicle Showbiz Correspondent
WHEN Gweru-based gospel outfit, Joyful Praise Choir (JPC) was scouting for a band to play on their latest project, settling for Bulawayo’s finest jazz ensemble, The Outfit Band was an easy choice. The charm and grandeur of The Outfit Band, an ensemble that has dominated the musical space in the City of Kings is undeniable, testimony of Bulawayo’s massive talent in the arts. Having played for many gospel acts in Zimbabwe, including South Africa-based Takesure Zamar Ncube among others, it was an easy task to blend with JPC. The Outfit Band’s jazzy touch and deep Afrocentric guitar work by Mokoomba guitarist, Trust Samende completes an amazing project that listeners will have a taste of on Wednesday when JPC releases new single Aiwa Mwari. “The reason why I worked with the Outfit is because I love their sound, especially from the time they were touring with Minister Takesure Zamar. I just felt that their sound and my vision connect somehow. They have done a great job defining the vision I am selling,” JPC founder and lead singer Gamaliel Madindi, told Chronicle Showbiz. Aiwa Mwari is an easy, sing-along song of praise that is expected to inspire gratefulness in the listeners. An early new year present from JPC’s upcoming DVD entitled JPC Season 3 Jeso Jeso, Aiwa Mwari is set to be a favourite of many and a befitting follow-up song to Ngoro Yeminana which became a national hit back in 2019. Despite sticking to Gweru as its base, JPC’s romance with Bulawayo talent has been evident in their choice of service providers whenever they host musical functions. Blessing Sitotombe, popularly known as Stotbass who began his stint with JPC during the Ngoro Yeminana project says he is excited to work with the fastest rising gospel group in Zimbabwe. “JPC is an amazing group, very talented and so relevant for our time. I have had the privilege to work with them from Ngoro Yeminana project to date. I started off as a stage manager for the Ngoro Yeminana project and now I’m assisting with production and music direction,” Sitotombe who also played bass on the project said. “Joyfull Praise Season 3 is a power packed project so diverse and full of anointed and energetic music. This is a must-have and I would encourage everyone to get it when it is released,” he said. Bulawayo-based media group; Fusion Media Group (FMG) also provided video production services on the new JPC project, testimony of their faith in Bulawayo talent. FMG founder, Tatenda Mkandla said following the successful Ngoro Yeminana project which garnered millions of YouTube views, the video production company was under pressure to up its game. “When a project you have done with that client has over 1,6 million views when you get a call from them it’s pressure. You know there is a bigger audience that is definitely going to watch the new project, so there is no room to mess up definitely,” Mkandla told Chronicle Showbiz. “Working on the second DVD with JPC was really hectic because we had a standard that we already set. So from planning, set up and filming it was a really challenging set but very exciting. We pushed our creativity a notch higher,” he said.