The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
RHUMBA superstar Fiselani Ngwenya, popularly known as SaMangwe, who commands the Super Legends Mlambos Express Band says Covid-19 is proving to be a serious threat to the survival of rhumba bands. With 13 albums under his belt, SaMangwe, one of the best live performers has seen it all in the rhumba music industry and the Covid-19 pandemic, he says, has greatly affected most bands’ livelihood and is threatening to disband them. “Covid-19 has hit us hard and our future as rhumba bands is under threat as we rely on crowds for live shows in order to earn a living. Now, since we can’t stage live shows, it’s like we’re in jail as we’re failing to operate as normal,” he said. He said what is worsening the situation is that some artistes, including his band, did not get the Covid-19 relief funds for artists from the Government. “When we tried to fill the online form (to apply for funds), we were told that it was now full. I don’t know what we’re supposed to do now,” said a frustrated SaMangwe. He appealed to the Government to urgently look at addressing the matter as their only means of supporting their families have dried up. “The situation is bad as all my band members look up to the band for survival because the band is their company. “Since we’re not performing, we now find ourselves stranded. But my greatest fear is losing them (band members) as they’ll be forced to look for other plans to earn a living. “Bringing them back will be a challenge and if the situation does not change soon, the band will be in big trouble hence my appeal to the Government.” The musician said even though he has tried to sell his music using internet platforms in order to supplement their income, there has not been any notable gain. “This has mainly been due to inaccessibility of the platforms. “The internet is very slow in selling rhumba music as there’re very few people buying the music on these platforms. “Despite having put all my music on almost all online platforms, buying music on such platforms requires one to have banking details and most of our fans do not have as most are in the rural areas with only a few in the diaspora,” he said. The Plan B hit-maker said internet piracy has also hit them hard as there are people who are using the online platforms to harvest where they did not sow. Sharing his 2021 plans, SaMangwe said he hopes to release an album and DVD once the Covid-19 pandemic is contained. “We’re hoping to release a DVD which will include some of our hit songs as well as a new album towards yearend,” he said. The father of four who is based in South Africa but is still in the country urged his fans to communicate with the band during these difficult times in order to support them. To try and educate people about the pandemic, the musician collaborated with Kanindo star Obadiah Matulane on a single titled Lockdown which laments the effects of the global pandemic and educates people about the virus. — @themkhust