The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
FUNDING remains the biggest challenge for domestic football to restart as Zifa is saying it has no capacity to do it alone. Defending Zifa during a radio show yesterday morning on ZBC’ Classic 263, Zifa board member for finance Philemon Machana said lack of funds led to the abandonment of the intended bio-bubble that they had hoped to undertake last year. “Last year the SRC came up with the approval on the basis of us playing in a bubble. That didn’t materialise because of funding constraints from Government because they were supposed to put something as well after the meeting we held. The PSL was supposed to approach their usual sponsors, but could not because it was year end as most companies had closed their budgets,” said Machana. “Zifa went on to commit funds towards Covid-19 testing but other stakeholders didn’t meet their end but PSL teams started to train.” The PSL is pushing for the resumption of football which means clubs should be prepared to dig deeper into their pockets as all matches will be played behind closed doors. Most PSL clubs heavily rely on gate takings to supplement their meagre revenue and with matches set to be played behind closed doors, this route looks rather unsustainable. According to the draft PSL proposal, the concept of playing behind closed doors requires a lot of financial resources but no returns. The PSL wants to restart football in a competition format that will cut costs and make it affordable for all teams. Besides clubs financing their teams’ camps, the PSL is also looking at engaging strategic partners for funding. “All the 18 PSL clubs will be required to pay the annual subscription fee of US$2 500 each before 28 February 2021. PSL is also requesting US$100 000 from the Fifa Covid-19 relief fund. The said amount will be used to pay staff salaries, rentals, stadium inspections, television production costs and other administrative costs,” the PSL document reads. “The League will engage Delta beverages to sponsor the competition. The package is expected to cover prize money, administration fee and fuel costs. The League will also engage Fidelity Life Assurance to cover players and technical officials for the 2021 football season. “The League will partner with local authorities, the Ministry of Youth, Sport, Arts and Recreation, Non-Governmental Organisations, the World League’s Forum and other private sector and organisations to ensure that football is played in a safe and secure environment,” the draft document reads. – @ZililoR