The Chronicle Chronicle Reporter THE Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission has arrested the Officer Commanding Matabeleland North Province Commissioner Erasmus Makodza for corruption related charges that were allegedly committed in 2019 when he was Officer Commanding Mashonaland East Province. Comm Makodza is being charged under the Criminal Law (Codification and Reform) Act for allegedly concealing from a principal a personal interest in a transaction. Comm Makodza was transferred from Mashonaland East to Harare Province before he was further redeployed to Matabeleland North Province in September last year. Zacc spokesperson Mr John Makamure yesterday confirmed the arrest. He said Comm Makodza is expected to appear in court today. “The accused person is currently helping us with investigations and will appear in court tomorrow, (today),” said Mr Makamure. Comm Makodza is alleged to have imposed his girlfriend, Maonei Chapfudza, as a private investor to work jointly with a farm in Marondera belonging to ZRP in several horticultural projects for his personal benefit. It is alleged that Makodza has a child with Chapfudza. Comm Makodza has held numerous senior deployments in the police force that include being the Officer Commanding CID Bulawayo Province as well as the Commander 2018 elections. Zacc is working on a higher target of cases to be investigated this year in its fight against corruption, amid indications it surpassed its target of 80 dockets last year. The Commission in 2020 managed to complete 90 dockets which were submitted to the National Prosecution Authority for prosecution. The target for the year was 80. Investigations by Zacc have resulted in the recovery of over US$5 million worth of corruptly-acquired property, including 501 vehicles in the past 18 months as authorities intensify efforts to hunt down proceeds of corruption as well as prosecute the offenders. Some of the high-profile cases that Zacc dealt with include the arrest of former Cabinet ministers whose cases are before the courts for criminal abuse of office as public officers. The arrest of the ministers – Prisca Mupfumira who was Public Service, Labour and Social Welfare Minister and Obadiah Moyo who served as Health and Child Care Minister – saw them being relieved of their duties. Another high-profile case is that of former Vice President Phelekezela Mphoko who is facing trial for abuse of office after he allegedly ordered the release of suspects in police custody. Former Energy and Power Development Minister Samuel Undenge was in June last year committed to prison to serve an effective 30-month sentence for abuse of office after losing his appeal in the High Court. Authorities are hunting down foreign assets suspected to have been corruptly acquired by Zimbabweans in South Africa, Britain, the United Arab Emirates, Malaysia, Mauritius and Kenya and have already submitted to the High Court eight applications for unexplained wealth orders as efforts intensify to eventually seize all proceeds of corruption. In his end of year message, President Mnangagwa said Government will not relent on pursuing proceeds of crime with ill-gotten wealth being forfeited to the State. He said efforts were also underway to extradite all fugitives of justice hiding in foreign jurisdictions. They include former Higher and Tertiary Education Science and Technology Minister Professor Jonathan Moyo, who is believed to be holed up in Kenya. Others are former Tourism and Hospitality Industry Minister Walter Mzembi and former Police Commissioner General Augustine Chihuri. 