The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Court Reporter
THE officer commanding police in Matabeleland North Province, Commissioner Erasmus Makodza, who is facing charges of corruptly roping in his girlfriend into a police farming project, was yesterday granted $10 000 bail. He has held numerous senior posts in the force including being the Officer Commanding CID Bulawayo Province as well as the National Commander 2018 elections. Comm Makodza allegedly committed the crimes in 2019 when he was Officer Commanding Mashonaland East Province. Makodza appeared before Harare regional magistrate Mr Stanley Mambanje facing charges of criminal abuse of duty as a public officer and corruptly concealing from a principal his personal interest in a transaction as defined in terms of sections 173 (1) (a) and 174 of the Criminal Law (Codification and Reform) Act. He was remanded to March 2. Makodza was ordered to report once a month and not interfere with witnesses as part of the bail conditions. The prosecutor, Mrs Netsai Mushayabasa said sometime in early 2019, Makodza, while he was officer commanding police in Mashonaland East, hatched a plan to corruptly benefit from projects which were being undertaken by the ZRP projects unit at Lendy Farm in Marondera, Mashonaland East Province. The court heard in pursuit of his plan, Makodza allegedly imposed his girlfriend, Ms Maonei Chapfudza purportedly to act as a private investor keen on investing at the police farm and focusing on horticulture, poultry and piggery production. “The accused person imposed Chapfudza knowing fully well that she was not an investor. Instead, he was in a relationship with her and she is the mother of his child,” said Mrs Mushayabasa. It was stated in court papers that Makodza did not disclose to his deputy, Assistant Commissioner Stephen Zengeya, his other subordinates including his principals that he was in a relationship with Chapfudza. He only instructed them to engage Chapfudza. In an effort to cover up and sanitise the corrupt engagement, the court heard that Makodza allowed the process of engaging his girlfriend to sail through by signing a memorandum of a joint venture between himself, Chapfudza and ZRP Mashonaland East. Part of the engagement process included a meeting between himself, Chapfudza and his subordinates. Makodza requested for a background check from Chapfudza and corruptly cleared her on March 14, 2019. “A final memorandum of joint venture between the parties was drafted and referred to Ass Comm Zengeya and he appended his signature as a witness, including Chapfudza. However, Makodza did not sign the document and instead simply acknowledged receipt,” said Mrs Mushayabasa. Investigations established that at the time of introducing Chapfudza to the projects unit and entering into a purported joint venture agreement, Makodza had a personal relationship with Chapfudza and that they had a child together. Further investigations established that the agreement gave the accused person the obligation to provide Lendy Farm together with the existing infrastructure for the purpose of conducting elaborated projects, appoint an accounting officer who will have access to the projects account for the purposes of accountability and ensure that the interests of ZRP and dues as per agreement are fully represented. “Chapfudza had an obligation to provide the capital for the joint venture projects to be undertaken at Lendy Farm, provide logistics and technical expertise for the production of crops and livestock management,” said Mrs Mushayabasa. It was established that the joint venture agreement was never fully implemented as per terms and conditions. Chapfudza started doing her own projects at the farm using ZRP resources and infrastructure for her personal benefit. She would sell the produce without remitting to the police 10 percent of the proceeds, in violation of the contract. Makodza was represented by Mr Tapiwa Makanza. — @mashnets