The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Chronicle Correspondent
MINISTER of Local Government and Public Works July Moyo has described the death of Chief Vezi Maduna Mafu as a blow to the country and the traditional leadership saying he will be remembered for his immense contribution in both the political and social development of the country. Chief Maduna died last Saturday morning at his Avoca homestead in Filabusi (Insiza), Matabeleland South Province. He was 86. Chief Maduna had been recovering at home from a stroke he suffered in 2019. He served as chief for 46 years. In a statement, Minister Moyo said Chief Maduna will be buried on Wednesday. “I have gone to the chief’s homestead together with the leadership of the province to convey my condolence message and we met family and clan members. We have been informed that the late Chief Maduna will be laid to rest on Wednesday February 17, 2021. His Excellency the President of the Republic of Zimbabwe and the Honourable Vice Presidents have been made aware of this sad loss. Government will make all the necessary contributions towards the funeral of Chief Maduna,” said Minister Moyo. He said Chief Maduna’s death was a shock to him and the country. “The death of our esteemed Chief is a blow to the country and the traditional leadership institution. Chief Maduna was one of the longest serving chiefs having been officially appointed as substantive chief on the 27th of August 1974. The traditional leadership institution is poorer without him,” said Minister Moyo. “The late chief will be remembered for his immense contribution in both the political and social development of this country. We are all aware that he was an ex-detainee who fought for the emancipation of this country.” He said Chief Maduna served in various portfolios that include being the first chairperson of Insiza Rural District Council, Central Committee member as well as a member of the Joint Central Committee. Chief Maduna was also Senator Chief for Insiza, a member of the National Consultative Assembly for Zanu-PF and also served as the chairperson for Matabeleland South Provincial Assembly of Chiefs. He was very instrumental in the development of the province as he facilitated the implementation of various projects in the sectors of health, education, agriculture and infrastructural development. He said Government joins the Maduna clan in mourning. “On behalf of the Government of Zimbabwe, the Ministry of Local Government and Public Works, the Deputy Minister, the Permanent Secretary, Principal Directors, Directors, Ministry staff and my own behalf, I would like to express my deepest condolences to the Maduna Clan and the community at large. Government joins the clan, relatives and friends in mourning the gallant son of the soil. May his dear soul rest in eternal peace.” Before Independence, Chief Maduna was detained for years for his involvement in the nationalist movement in the 1960s and 1970s. During the Pearce Commission of 1972, which was an attempt by both the British and Ian Smith to legitimise Rhodesia’s Unilateral Declaration of Independence, Chief Maduna led his people in Insiza District to reject the commission. His political activities led to the Rhodesian government arresting and detaining him in 1976, where he spent most of his time in solitary confinement and was only released during the ceasefire period. In 1981, he was elected a Zapu councillor and became the first chairperson of the Insiza Rural District Council.
Chief Maduna was also elected the party’s vice chairperson for Matabeleland South Provincial Authority. In 1984 at the PF-Zapu Congress he was elected into the Central Committee and was to remain a member of the Central Committee until the signing of the Unity Accord between Zanu and PF-Zapu in December 1987. After the uniting of the two liberation movements, Chief Maduna served the party in various capacities, including being a Member of Parliament.