The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
THE second highest inflows in dams in 50 years have been recorded countrywide, following incessant rains. The dams received 47,5 percent inflows between the end of October last year and end of January this year. This had not happened in 46 years as higher inflows were only recorded in 1974 when 48,6 percent was received. In a statement on Twitter, the Zimbabwe National Water Authority (Zinwa) said the development should result in local authorities improving water supplies to areas under their jurisdiction. “Between the end of October when the rains started and January 31 2021, our dams gained 47,5 percent inflows only second to the 48,6 percent inflows recorded at the end of January in 1974. The inflows are the second highest to be recorded between October and January since 1970,” said Zinwa in a statement. “All those involved in the value chain should see to it that the water benefits the citizenry. These include our local authorities that supply water in the urban areas.” Zinwa said the country’s dams were 89 percent full and several dams were already spilling. The improved inflows should be sweet news for farmers involved in irrigation farming post the rainy season. The water parastatal said more dams could be spilling if the country had received normal rains in the 2019/20 rainy season. This was after some individuals queried why some of the dams were not spilling as rains continue to fall countrywide. Some Bulawayo residents have been querying on social media platforms why Bulawayo supply dams were not filling up compared to water bodies in other parts of the country. “Our dams were critically low when the season opened. If we had a normal season last year, the dams would be full,” tweeted Zinwa. “The national dam levels average now stands at 88,9 percent. Sanyati dam levels average of 106,9 percent, Gwayi Catchment 100,6 percent, Manyame 72,4 percent, Mazowe Catchment, 77,9 percent, Mzingwane Catchment 83,4 percent, Runde 97,6 percent and Save 72,9 percent.” While the national dam levels stand at 89 percent, Bulawayo’s six supply dams — situated in Matabeleland South Province — are still 56 percent full after receiving only 35 percent inflows since the start of the rainy season. Insiza dam is 66 percent full, Inyakuni dam 56 percent, Upper Ncema dam 61 percent, Lower Ncema dam 40 percent, Umzingwane dam 30 percent and Mtshabezi 45 percent full. The improved inflows into the Bulawayo dams have resulted in council reducing water shedding exercise to three days per week. The situation had deteriorated to an extent that council was supplying water, when it was available, only once a week for about 12 hours to suburbs. Some high lying areas like parts of Lobengula, Magwegwe and Sizinda had gone for months without tap water. — @nqotshili