The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
With 21 albums to their name over the 22 years they have been in the music industry, Tornado Heroes has been one of the most consistent Rhumba music bands. Their honour has been having their music played on national radio stations and peoples’ homes. The group that was formed in 1999 by three family members, Power Ndlovu, Canious Dube and Kevin Dube only has one member left, Kevin. Narrating how the group got its name, Kevin said: “We formed the group during the time when Mozambique was topical as it was facing natural disasters like floods and strong winds. There was fear that the disaster would even affect other countries. We didn’t want to call the band by our names so we decided to bring the name Tornado due to what was going on and just added Heroes,” said Kevin. He said Canious who was his uncle, left the band in 2007 when he relocated to Durban from Johannesburg, leaving him with lead guitarist – nephew Power Ndlovu who unfortunately passed away in July, 2009. Canious played the bass guitar and provided lead vocals for the group. Following the departure of the two, Kevin said he almost called it quits but he then found it in him to try and keep the band alive, hence his decision to rope in new members, Qinisani Ncube (bass guitar), Likhwa Ndlovu (rhythm guitar), Themba Dumani (lead guitar) and Bright Ndlovu (drums). With these members, they have successfully recorded 12 albums. Kevin said many musical bands fail because band owners do not pay their members well forcing them to quit or move on thereby affecting the quality of music. “I’m well aware of this fact so I treat all band members with utmost respect even though I’m the owner. This is what has kept the band intact this long. I respect the views of all band members and try by all means to get their input in the running of the band,” said Kevin who is now the lead vocalist. “If you’re the band owner, you must be open on the issue of money. Once members know how much the band has made and you share it satisfactorily with them, there won’t be a problem. Every band member must have a sense of ownership of the band. I’ve made it a point to run the band that way and that has kept us going.” The 41-year-old father of four who hails from Skente area in Tsholotsho said he is inspired by the late Rhumba Legend, Ndux Malax. “I sing music that comforts, educates, inspires and entertains. Some of the band’s hit songs include Indoda engela Batshi, Kwanele, Bazali Bami, Mahlabezulu and Dlamini,” he said. In 2012, the band did two collaborations with Gwese Super Sounds on the Vuka Ndoda album and in 2019, they worked with Rhumba maestro, Allen Ndoda on the Album Sid’isikhathi. Last year, the band had hoped to record its 22nd album but could not do so due to the Covid-19 pandemic. However, they are now working on it. – @themkhust