The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
RAPPER G.T.I has made a comeback to the music scene after more than three years saying he wants to fill the gap left in the music industry following the death of his mentor Cal Vin. G.T.I, real name Thamsanqa Nyathi this week released a track and its music video, Spectacular Vernacular 2, that is a precursor to his album and music videos this year. The musician was one of the artistes that were signed under Cal Vin’s record label Kontrol Tribe. GTI broke into the music scene in 2016 with thought provoking lyrics on the track Spectacular Vernacular that shot him to fame and got him to be signed by the late Cal Vin. Then the two came together in 2017 and recorded one of the most underrated tracks in the country’s hip-hop music industry, Selifikile, where G.T.I was laying the lyrics while Cal Vin was on the chorus. After failing to breakthrough, G.T.I dropped singing and started operating a barbershop in the western areas in 2018. After raising some money, in 2019 he enrolled for driving lessons and obtained a class two driver’s licence. He was then hired by Zupco as a conductor, the job he is doing now. Following the death of Cal Vin last year, G.T.I who hails from Barbourfields in Bulawayo, said his mentor left a huge gap in the music industry which he wants to fill. “There’s a lot of responsibility this time around because I’m representing my fellow friend and mentor, the late Cal Vin. He taught us a lot of things in the music industry and he left us a good foundation to build upon,” said G.T.I.
He said that was why he was bringing a part two of Spectacular Vernacular that shot him to fame. “This song is an inspiration and I decided I’d release Spectacular Vernacular time and again because that’s how people initially got to know me and from then on, we started working on more music,” said G.T.I. He said he was preparing to work on more music videos and music and setting up a clothing line. “This year it’s more music, more videos and I’m also dropping a solid body of work, it might be an album/ mixtape, EP or something like that. I’m also working on a few business ideas, I want to push merchandise, which I’ll start advertising on my next music video. My brand is called Stayela Gang and under it is Stayela Music and Stayela Merchandise, people should expect good for music and in return be ready to buy and support it,” said G.T.I. He said as part of pushing his brand he partnered with Ndebeles Connect. “I just partnered with Ndebeles Connect. They like my style a lot and they are willing to help push my music and vision further. I partnered with them because we already have a lot in common, they are organised, they are very passionate about music and they are consistent,” said G.T.I. — Follow on Twitter @bonganinkunzi