The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu FROM childhood, she has always swum against the tide. From doing woodwork at school when other girls happily did home economics to studying electrical engineering after her secondary school studies, she always knew she wanted to be different. She spent her childhood years rebelling from perceived etiquette that defines a “real woman” by their ability to clean, cook and do all domestic chores for the family. She is an iron-willed woman who has never been afraid to stand for what she believes is right. The maxim “Respect everyone and take what you deserve from life,” is her motto. Her day starts at 4AM when the single mum drives about 30km to Nyamandlovu to pick farm produce for resale to put food on the table for her three children, parents and the extended family. By 8AM she is expected to be seated in her office at Pumula Housing Office from where she serves Bulawayo’s Ward 19 and doubles as caretaker councillor for Ward 17. With an allowance of just 10 litres of petrol per month, she is expected to serve the whole ward using her own resources and address the needs of her community, which raised her to be a resilient politician. Active participation in school development committees and residents’ association was all that councillor Sikhululekile Moyo (45) needed to climb the political ladder. The dog eat dog “dirty” domain long considered male territory was just one of the many mountains Skhue, as she is affectionately called by residents in her ward, has had to conquer in life. The authoritative councillor is an uncompromising non-conformist who yields to no one in her pursuit for a world where a person’s achievements are not limited or defined by gender and societal norms. Skhue has set her mind on smashing through the glass ceiling of gender stereotyping that retards women’s progress. She dates her love for politics back to the 1980s when as a primary school child, she only chased after what society deemed ‘manly’. Being the last born in a family of 17 children, Skhue vowed that she would rather wake up to sell vegetables with her father than help her older siblings with housework. Skhue recalls how as a woman in politics she spent years toiling for the party only to be allowed to contest as a councillor in 2018, 19 years later. “I have been in politics since 1999, since the formation of the MDC. I’m one of the founders of the MDC. Although I got into politics at a young age, it took me 19 years to be in a position of power maybe because I am a woman. I know some men only need three or so years of active politics before they can contest in elections.” She says her challenges with gender inequalities did not end with her winning the 2018 elections as she was welcomed by a male dominated chauvinistic council that does not value women. As one of the six female councillors out of 29 in Bulawayo, Skhue says the battle to be heard, considered and treated equally continues although female politicians have done a lot for their communities. Skhue believes the motherly instinct embedded in every female is what sets women apart from male politicians and makes them extra special. “As mothers, we empathise with everyone. We actually walk in the shoes of the electorate and would not want to make decisions that would make people suffer. We strive for the solution that does the best for the majority, if everyone cannot be accommodated,” she observes with a smile, showing off her white teeth. “My first meeting was traumatic because as a veteran politician who had spent years mobilising and helping to form structures, I knew I had a right to speak freely and represent the people who had voted me into power. Then the opposite happened, I realised it was going to be hard for me and my female colleagues to speak up, as gender inequalities are present just like in many institutions in patriarchal Zimbabwe,” she says. “When you raise your hand, they would object and question if you are able to say anything tangible. They wanted to treat us as their children who should fear them but I refused and treated them like my equals. It’s not like men always have the most brilliant ideas but they support each other and even clap hands for each other. This boosts their confidence which they sometimes use to silence women.” She shakes her head in disbelief as she recalls a day, she got a rude political awakening. Skhue reveals that her greatest disappointment as a councillor was the discovery that women still need approval from men and are not yet ready to rally and support a fellow woman. “I once contested to be the deputy mayor but my male counterparts told me to withdraw my name and even convinced other females not to vote for me. I was voted by one male councillor. The rest did not think I qualify and it hurts to see that as women we still cannot accept that we are worthy and able to take top leadership positions.” Skhue marks three years in office this year and looks back at the community projects she has managed to run, with the little influence she holds by being a councillor. As a single mother of three she has been mocked, belittled and labelled unfit because of her marital status but maintains that her family is the best support system she has as a female politician. “I think marriage was going to make me miserable because I doubt I was going to be able to be reporting to a man who does no support my dreams. Now, I can work anyhow and dedicate my time to serving the community. The other thing is these political positions do not come with money so I still have to wake up early to fend for the family and then dedicate my time to the Pumula community,” she says. Her three children, she says with an affection creeping into her voice, helped her conduct door-to-door campaigns in 2018. Her eyes light up as she describes how her children are the bedrock of her achievements and how they psyche her up to face daily challenges including people who think she cannot lead simply because she is a single mother. “I have a wonderful family which includes my two girls. My mother who turns 90 this year has been a pillar of strength and keeps me going as she has always believed in me. I remember us designing my campaign fliers at home with my children and nieces and it’s the kind of support that keeps me going even when I’m tempted to give up,” she says. “My siblings and cousins abroad have also helped and injected some funds into projects that I am passionate about and with all this support I have no reason to give up because I need to show upcoming young women that it is possible to join and stay in politics.” Since her election into council she has been to Sweden, Kenya, Zambia, representing Zimbabwe (women) at different fora. She recently won the first award in Gender champion, drivers of change Zimbabwe. Skhue was chosen to represent Zimbabwe at the International Women’s Day celebrations in The Hague but the trip was cancelled as it coincided with worldwide Covid-19 lockdown travel restrictions. In council the multi-talented Skhue sits on three committees: The Health, Housing and Education; the General Purposes and Future Water Supplies and Water Action Committee which she chairs. Part of her aims as the chair is: “To advocate for more dams to be constructed for Bulawayo to enhance the water supply for our robust city,” she says. Skhue believes water is a crucial driver for development and perennial shortages are stopping Bulawayo from realising its full investment and growth potential. “When I got into the office, I offered youths an office so that we share information, ideas that can be used to bring about development in the ward. Pumula Youth Leadership Forum which has been so instrumental in ensuring residents are well catered for even in terms of service delivery is a good sounding board for new ideas and a fountain for alternative views,” she adds. “There is a group that deals with fundraising and another one called Imvelo with which we plant trees around the ward at churches, schools and the housing office every Friday to preserve our environment. We have groups for artists who are doing all sorts of activities just to keep themselves occupied and productive since there’re high levels of unemployment, especially since most companies in the city closed years ago. Skhue says grooming young women whom she believes are the future has been one of her achievements. “I have spearheaded several awareness projects for the girl child, income generating projects for youth and women, crime preventive initiatives and sought assistance for families who fall into tragic incidences like those whose houses are gutted by fire. “The community Covid-19 task force is led by a girl so that as they grow, they won’t struggle to contest in the future as they are used to lead. Young people should get into position of power in the community so that in the future when faced with challenges similar to ours, they confidently take lead knowing that they are unstoppable and they have what it takes to make our country a better place for all of us,” adds Skhue. — @thamamoe