The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
TWO million rand is up for grabs at a new talent search show named Talented Africa which is expected to draw contestants from South Africa, Zimbabwe, Uganda, Ghana and Nigeria among other countries. A brainchild of Ugandan, Anthony Kabugo Nyanzi, Talented Africa is set to be hosted by the International Music African Academy. The inaugural competition is expected to be held at the International Convention Centre (ICC) in Durban, South Africa between August and November this year. Judges will include Zimbabwean veteran poet Albert Nyathi, South African songstress Zahara, Ugandan musician Cindy Sanyu, South African poet HRH Zolani Mkiva and Ugandan entertainer, comedian and actress Kansiime Anne. The hosts will be Farai Pascal (Zimbabwe) and Karitas Karisimbi (Rwanda). Speaking from his South African base, Nyanzi said the primary aim of the competition is to develop natural talents and abilities while uniting African countries. He said the competition will be held under the theme: “Unveiling Africa Together”. “Talented Africa is mainly meant to bring hope and promote social cohesion in Africa. I’m a Ugandan who lives in South Africa and I decided to launch this show in South Africa to bring peace and promote social cohesion among Africans in South Africa. From there, the show will be hosted in other countries, but for now, the focus is South Africa as many Africans leave their motherlands to grow their skills and talents here,” he said. Added Nyanzi: “This competition will help the contestants to fine tune their monologue, stage presence, vocal exercise and character development. The participants will also be equipped to focus on the comprehensive scope of how to interpret their professional approach to the business of entertainment. “As we know, it’s not only just one’s talent and passion that sets one into the entertainment world, but also the business mindset.” Nyanzi called on all Africans to take up the opportunity and ensure they are part of the memorable event. “We invite all nations to join us in the struggle of uniting and promoting social cohesion in Africa. Talented Africa competition will be hosted annually, not only for entertainment purposes, but to unite and promote the Africanism spirit worldwide,” said Nyanzi. To be part of the competition, those interested are being urged to record their act and upload a two-minute video on the competition’s website. Judges will then go through with the selection process and the shortlisted ones will battle it out at the ICC. — @mthabisi_mthire