The Chronicle ISN’T it amazing that police in Bulawayo have had to bring in the horse and dog units in a bid to deal with people violating lockdown regulations meant to curb the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic? After God created the Heavens, the Earth and all creatures, He gave man dominion over all things. So, the normal thing is that man shepherds all animals to safety. But today, animals are shepherding man. Horses and dogs are ensuring that man does not get killed by Covid-19. Horses and dogs are protecting man from himself. Is that not strange? We are reminded of the story of Moses and his people that he had saved from bondage in Egypt. Whenever faced by the pains of the wilderness, they were quick to forget the pain and suffering they endured daily when they were still slaves. At one time they said to Moses: “Was it because there were no graves in Egypt that you brought us to the desert to die? What have you done to us by bringing us out of Egypt?” Covid-19 is the new Egypt. To get to the promised land we must all follow the commandments. We must not cry for graves in Egypt when there is life in Canaan. What does it take to get people to stay at home only for a few days? Is there still someone normal who needs to be forced to wear a face mask or to keep a social distance of at least one metre? On Saturday police teams were conducting raids in the city centre and officers riding horses could be seen apprehending vendors hiding among crowds waiting to board buses to their various destinations near the Small City Hall. Police were also conducting raids using dogs and vehicles while other law enforcement agents were conducting foot patrols in other parts of the city centre. In a story we carried yesterday, we quoted Bulawayo provincial police spokesperson Inspector Abednico Ncube saying the deployment of the teams is part of measures to step up enforcement of lockdown regulations. He said between Saturday and Sunday, police in Bulawayo arrested 6 491 people for violating lockdown measures. “We have observed that many people are not taking lockdown regulations seriously so we have enlisted the services of all policing departments in an effort to reduce the number of people coming into town without a cause. We now have horses, canine which is our dog section, motorised patrols and those on foot. “This is all to make sure that there is sanity in the city. Those who are not supposed to come without exemption letters or without reason such as going to hospitals to see doctors or pharmacies must stay at home,” said Insp Ncube. Late last month, Government extended the Level 4 National lockdown by another two weeks and is expected to end this coming Monday. The measures seem to be paying off as Covid-19 infections and deaths have started decreasing. And they will continue to decrease if regulations are followed. Monday is only a few days away. There is no need to be controlled by horses and dogs.