The Chronicle Yvonne Ncube and Fairness Moyana, Chronicle Reporters
POLICE have said more people drowned last year in the country compared to the previous year. From January to December 2020, 483 people drowned compared to the 411 in 2019. So far this year, 59 people have drowned. Some of those who have drowned this year are motorists who took the fatal decision to cross flooded rivers. National police spokesperson Assistant Commissioner Paul Nyathi said last year, Bulawayo recorded the least number of cases at seven while Mashonaland West recorded the highest number 97 cases. “Of the 483 cases recorded in the year 2020, 26 cases were recorded in Harare, seven in Bulawayo, 54 in Midlands, 55 in Manicaland, 55 in Masvingo, 30 in Matabeleland North, 31 in Matabeleland South, 58 in Mashonaland East, 70 in Mashonaland Central and 97 in Mashonaland West,” said Asst Comm Nyathi. He said 59 drowning cases have been recorded in the country so far this year. From the 59 cases, 49 of those who drowned were male while 10 were female. “It has been observed that more males drowned compared to females. Among the 59 recorded cases 49 were male while 10 were female,” said Asst Comm Nyathi. He said cases of drowning occur when people try to cross flooded rivers, streams and other water points. Some people have been marooned following heavy rains forcing the Air Force of Zimbabwe to rescue them. A number of children have drowned while playing or swimming in rivers, trenches and other water bodies. Among adults who drown are those who would be fishing. “As the rainy season is still continuing, the police urge the public to be safety conscious and avoid crossing, swimming and allowing children to play in water bodies,” said Asst Comm Nyathi. Meanwhile, the body of a 16-year-old boy who reportedly drowned last week in Shangani River, Nkayi while swimming with a friend is yet to be located. Bukosi Moyo who was herding cattle dived into the river before being swept away. Matabeleland North provincial police spokesperson, Inspector Glory Banda said last week on Monday morning, police received a report of a teenager who had drowned while swimming with a friend, a day earlier. As the boy was struggling to swim, his friend tried to rescue him to no avail. Villagers are continuing to search for the body while waiting for the arrival of the police sub aqua unit. “On 14 February Mukosi Ncube and Bukosi Moyo proceeded to the grazing area where their cattle were. After finding the cattle they proceeded to Shangani River for a swim. Informant, Mukosi Ncube got into the water first and began to swim while Bukosi Moyo removed his clothes and dived into the deep waters. Informant realised that he was struggling to swim and attempted to rescue him but failed, “ said Insp Banda. The friend rushed back home to alert Bukosi’s step-mother of the incident. The woman mobilised community members to conduct a search in the river, but nothing was found. Police were called in and the police sub aqua unit was alerted about the incident but it is yet to visit the scene. Villagers are, meanwhile continuing with the search. — @SeehYvonne