The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
POLICE in Victoria Falls have arrested a mechanic who had terrorised residents by breaking into vehicles stealing car batteries and wheels. Isaac Desmond Banda (25) of 1377 Chinotimba is facing six counts of theft after breaking into six cars between April and December last year. He would then sell the parts for cheaper prices. Banda was arrested last week following investigations by police. Police are making more inquiries on a series of other theft of car parts crimes that have been happening in the city which Banda could be linked to. Banda appeared before Victoria Falls magistrate Ms Lindiwe Maphosa on Friday charged with six counts of theft.
He applied for bail and the magistrate remanded him in custody to Wednesday for ruling. Prosecuting, Mr Listen Nare said Banda stole car batteries, wheels and spark plugs from five complainants, stealing twice from one of them. “Sometime in April 2020, the complainant Mr Shingirai Musariri hired Banda to attend to a fault on his BMW car which was parked at his place of residence. The complainant left the accused alone fixing the car. The accused took advantage of the complainant’s absence and took away a 12-volts battery and went away,” said the prosecutor. The court heard that Banda sold the battery for US$70. On the second count Banda allegedly stole a wheel from a car belonging to Mr Simplicity Mauswa who had taken it to him for fixing and sold it for US$30. He also allegedly stole a car battery from Mr Kurauone Chawira who is director of Fife Motors in Victoria Falls. The court was told that Banda sneaked into Mr Chawira’s workshop on October 8 last year and stole a 12-volt battery and went away. The vehicle had been brought by a client to Mr Chawira’s workshop for fixing. On November 27 Banda approached Ms Tariro Moyo-Musekiwa at her home and offered to help her secure her two parked vehicles by balancing them on bricks since they had breakdowns. Banda allegedly secured one of the cars but allegedly returned at night and stole two wheels. He also allegedly stole spark plugs from a taxi driver Mr Jericho Mudenda who had parked his car at home on December 7. — @ncubeleon