The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Thirteen pupils who completed Grade Seven last year and are waiting for the opening of schools, have teamed up to record music. Calling themselves the Skool Kidz, the pupils approached Plumtree-based promoter, Handsome Sibanda of Toundtainment Events to assist them record their works. Realising their determination, Sibanda gave them the platform and the teens successfully recorded a song titled Hay’bo which is now getting radio airplay on Skyz Metro FM. The group recorded visuals for the track which were dropped last week and the video has already garnered more than 5 000 views on YouTube. Sibanda praised the Skool Kidz (Alicia Sibanda, Nigel Khumalo, Phakamani Khumalo, Whitney Dumani, Christine Tshuma, Tatiana Mpofu, Thandekile Ndlovu, Andile Tshuma, Takudzwa Mnikwa, Hendry Ndlovu, Tanyani Mudau, Thandeka Nyathi and Dimpho Maseko) saying their determination will definitely take them far. He said the school kids have a great future in the arts industry and all they need is support. “On December 7, a group of school pupils came looking for me. They were 15 and all in school uniform (Alan Redfern). Unfortunately, I wasn’t around so they came again days later until they found me. They told me they came together as friends as they wished to do a project with me before they separate after writing exams. “I asked what type of project and they said they wanted to do a professional song with a music video. I asked them why they’d approached me and they said it was because everyone kept telling them I was the one who helps artistes,” said Sibanda. He said he first engaged the pupils’ parents who all gave him the green light. “The parents agreed then I reached out to DJ Skaiva who offered to do a beat for them. Mzoe 7 offered to help them write and polish the song they already had. Because we had a couple of costs like fuel to Bulawayo for them to record and studio time, various individuals came through to assist here and there, among them Dummz Butchery which provided fuel money,” said Sibanda. He said they successfully recorded the song that was produced by DJ Skaiva and was released on December 27. “While in Bulawayo, Skyz Metro FM offered to do a radio interview for the kids which was done by Khekhe. A friend then connected us with Afri Art media group which offered to do a professional music video for the kids. “So many people came together to assist with costumes and various other stuff we needed during the shoot. The video was released on YouTube and garnered 1 600 views in less than 24 hours and the views are increasing” said Sibanda. – @mthabisi_mthire