The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
BULAWAYO-based musician, Prince Mpofu aka Fab G Mshana Ka Gogo is promoting his personalised hip-hop which he has named Umthobanhliziyo Tribal. The 22-year-old artiste recently released a seven-track EP titled Isibane with the personalised hip-hop songs. Fab G Mshana Ka Gogo from Old Magwegwe suburb, said the EP which is his first one, has tracks — Nomvula, Thenjiwe, Kushubile, Isibane, Vuma, Londolozela and Emathandweni. Describing his unique genre, Fab G Mshana Ka Gogo said it is a Southern African lyrical cultured genre which represents the Bantu Tribe. “Inspired by genres like Afro-fusion, maskandi and hip-hop with a touch of poetry, the genre is all about encompassing a traditional feel as well as a modern one. It is a heart healing genre that comes with good black culture values, messages of encouragement, hope and sufficient provision of working through the challenges of life,” he said. The artiste said the first song that brought the genre to life was called Amafufu which was inspired by a Ndebele proverb “Ukufela amafufu njengegundwane”. “The single inspired an album titled Emhlabeni which I’m yet to release as I’m still working on it. Basically, Umthobanhliziyo was introduced to make people understand their origins because if we don’t know where we came from, then we won’t know where we’re going,” said Fab G Mshana KaGogo. Interestingly, before taking up the mic, the artiste was a soccer player. “In 2015, I decided to hang my football boots and headed for the studio although many thought I was going to be a star in the soccer field. “As a person who grew up in Old Magwegwe, it wasn’t easy jumping onto the rap genre, but with the support of my grandmother, Dorothy Mpofu who raised me, I believed in myself and took up all challenges.” This is probably why he calls himself granny’s boy (mshana kagogo) as his granny has certainly been his pillar of strength. In 2016, Fab G Mshana KaGogo who says he was inspired by the likes of Zola, Eminem and Sjava, released a single titled My Prayer which opened doors for him as it led him to join hip- hop crew, Team Sides. “As a group we released an album called Ses’khona which opened a lot of doors. In 2018, I decided to embark on a solo career as I wanted to tell my stories through music,” he said. In 2019, Fab G Mshana KaGogo dropped the tracks Komborera dzimba dzemabwe, Amafufu and last year he released Phenduk’ekhaya. His solo career seems to be paying off as he is one of the most requested artistes on Khulumani FM. Sunduza Dance Theatre’s melodious Ubuhle Bakho song that he featured on landed on national television ZBCtv. Fab G Mshana KaGogo has also performed at several big events around Bulawayo that include Shake It and Stomp Talent Show at Eziko, Ghetto to Ghetto, Bigger than hip-hop and the Summer carnival. Turning to his plans for 2021, Fab G Mshana Ka Gogo said he hopes to establish a record label which he will use to promote other artistes from the city. “My vision is to elevate the City of Kings and Queens through art so I want to open my own stable, #Umthobanhliziyo Tribe.” — @mthabisi_mthire