The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Gwanda Correspondent
WHEN the Jahunda Community Information Centre (CIC) was opened in August 2017, there was hope that it would help bridge the digital divide in Gwanda. The centre, which is housed at Jahunda township’s Zimpost premises, brought smiles to many people in the area and beyond. During its official opening, Government also donated computers to 12 schools in the province. The schools are Limpopo Primary School (Beitbridge), Masera Secondary School (Beitbridge), Kungubo Primary School (Bulilima), Bezu Secondary School (Bulilima), Makwe Primary School (Gwanda), Nyandeni Secondary School (Gwanda), Tshazi Primary School (Insiza), Mkwabeni Secondary School (Insiza), Tjehondo Primary School (Matobo), Gambuzi Secondary School (Umzingwane), Bulu Primary School (Mangwe) and Vulankalo Secondary School (Mangwe). Going into the fourth year following its opening, the centre is now in a state of decay. At the entrance, one is greeted by grass that has spread all over the yard. The centre’s gates are always locked. The absence of a functioning information centre during the time of Covid-19, is a major setback when it comes to information dissemination. The Jahunda centre was installed with a state-of-the-art WiFi facility that could have come in handy given the new normal regulations. Zimpost postmaster general Mr Sifundo Moyo said the closure of the centre was due to infrastructure dilapidation. “The setting up of the CICs is meant to bridge the digital divide between the urban and the rural populace. The Jahunda Community Information Centre, situated at Jahunda Post Office, which was commissioned on 12 August 2017, is a vital centre for access to internet and information as it plays a catalytic role to development within the Matabeleland South Province. “At present the centre is temporarily not functioning due to infrastructural repairs on the ceiling that had also damaged electrical fittings and wirings that were posing serious risks to CIC customers and staff working at the centre,” said Mr Moyo. He said at one point equipment at the facility was stolen. “The situation was further exacerbated by the theft of some of the CIC equipment when thieves broke into the centre and got away with vital equipment like the server, media converter and joy sticks. This has also been a setback to the CIC that will need to be resolved first through replacement of the stolen equipment before the CIC is re-opened,” said Mr Moyo. He said the global pandemic has affected repair works. “The effects of the Covid-19 global pandemic has been devastating to say the least. The need to flatten the curve and limit its spread has resulted in the National Lockdown programme that have restricted movements, reduced working hours as well as having a curfew. “This has affected the works programme to restore the CIC to be a safe facility for the residents. We are hoping that as the situation normalises we will be able to finish the building maintenance and open the CIC to the Jahunda Community again,” said Mr Moyo. “Our Property Services division will undertake the building maintenance exercise once the lockdown conditions have been eased. We continue to engage the Jahunda community and encourage them to fully utilise the CIC, once these issues have been resolved. “We once again call upon the communities in all areas of Zimbabwe where these CICs have been established to jealously guard and protect these facilities and the equipment contained there-in. They should report any cases of vandalism and theft of equipment from these centres to the law enforcement authorities,” said Mr Moyo. Gwanda mayor councillor Njabulo Siziba said the community has been greatly affected by the closure of the facility when it comes to access to information. “I am sure this is a great blow to the community. I am not privy to the full details of who runs the centre but we will get to the bottom of this and ensure that the community of Gwanda benefits,” said Clr Siziba. A resident who spoke on condition of anonymity said at one time the centre was used to conduct private lessons for pupils. “At one point the Zimpost site was turned into a private Maths lessons circus. People were observed time and again vandalising the structure by sitting on top of the tables among other things,” said the resident.