The Chronicle Midlands Bureau Chief TWO brothers who were fighting each other at a shrine after the elder brother accused his sibling of having an affair with his wife allegedly turned on a Good Samaritan who had tried to stop the fight and killed him. One of the two brothers allegedly held the Good Samaritan upside down with his feet up and head down while the other one stabbed him several times all over the body with a knife. Pardon Guzhumura (22) was allegedly killed by Emmanuel Matura (21) and Felix (25) while his mother known as Madzimai Nancy – a self-proclaimed prophet- and some sect members watched helplessly. The incident happened around 11pm on Monday at a shrine belonging to Madzimai Nancy in Greenvale, Gweru. Madzimai Nancy’s shrine is popular with artisanal miners and people who want to be cleansed of evil spirits. Sources said Felix and Emmanuel worked together as artisanal miners and would consult Madzimai Nancy together so that she could assist them to get gold when panning. “On Monday morning, Felix and Emmanuel visited Madzimai Nancy’s shrine in Greenvale for prayers so that they get gold when panning. Madzimai Nancy told them to return at night since she consulted for people spiritually only at night,” said the source. The source said the brothers spent the day drinking beer before making their way to Madzimai Nancy’s shrine around 10pm. When they got to the shrine, Felix’s pregnant wife was allegedly being prayed for by Madzimai Nancy. The source said Felix allegedly ordered Madzimai Nancy to consult and confirm if the pregnancy was indeed his or Emmanuel’s. “Felix and Emmanuel started fighting each other with Felix accusing his brother of being in love with his wife,” said the source. It is at this stage, the source said, that Madzimai Nancy’s son intervened. “The brothers turned on him with Emmanuel holding him upside down Undertaker (WWE Wrestling superstar) style while Felix stabbed him before they ran away from the shrine,” said the source. Midlands provincial police spokesperson Inspector Emmanuel Mahoko confirmed the alleged murder of Guzhumura at his mothers’ shrine by the two brothers. “I can confirm that two brothers Felix and Emmanuel Matura who had gone for spiritual cleansing at a shrine in Greenvale, Gweru, allegedly killed Pardon Guzhumura following a misunderstanding. Guzhumura was assaulted first before he was stabbed several times all over his body,” he said. Insp Mahoko said the matter was reported to the police who attended the scene before Guzhumura was rushed to Gweru Provincial Hospital where he was pronounced dead on arrival. The two suspects were arrested and they are assisting police with investigations. “As the police, we appeal to members of the public to desist from using violence to solve their problems. The police are there to solve problems and so are community leaders because violence leads to loss of property and lives,” he said.