The Chronicle THE Grain Marketing Board (GMB) is working on expanding storage capacity and setting up collection centres ahead of the anticipated bumper harvest. The country hopes to secure more than 3,1 million tonnes of maize this season. It is hoped that if the envisaged yield is achieved, Zimbabwe, which requires 1,8 million tonnes if grain annually, will have a surplus of 1,2 million tonnes. According to ZBC News, so far, five of the 12 silo facilities have been refurbished with work on the other seven scheduled for completion by April when the harvesting starts. The 12 silo complexes can store 750 000 tonnes. In an interview with ZBC News this week, GMB general manager Mr Rockie Mutenha said on the surface, the silos would have concrete to preserve grain from loose soil that might be moist. “We have identified more than 500 collection points and the process is ongoing. We have placed tarpaulins (tents) enough to cover the bags. “Over and above this, we have entered into agreements with private players with silos and shades for storage facilities for us to use,” he said. In addition, GMB can store bagged maize and other grains under canvas, as it has done in past bumper seasons, and is planning on being able to store an additional 2,5 million tonnes in this way. Farmers rarely deliver all their harvest, needing to keep part back for family and farm consumption. With the elimination of consumer subsidies, replaced by direct payments to the poor to buy food, the arbitrage opportunities of selling all the grain produced and buying cheaper refined meal are eliminated. Besides maize, there is high expectations of a large harvest of traditional grains, with the off-farm surplus again being bought by GMB. More than 100 stacker machines to carry grain bags have been refurbished. Millers will start taking delivery of their regular requirements as soon as the GMB gets its first deliveries and Zimbabwe switches from imported grain to pure local product, with regular purchases from the marketing board then continuing. It is hoped that this would allow grain in temporary storage to be moved quickly to the millers. Mr Mutenha said GMB would follow all recommended standard operating procedures for Covid-19 so that depots were free from infection. “We are going to pre-book commercial farmers to avoid congestion at the depot. We will not allow a person without a facemask and all procedures such as sanitising and temperature checks will be followed,” he said. Processing of payments would now be done at depots as they had moved away from the old system of submitting paperwork to head office. “Our duty here at head office will be to look for the money. We have upgraded our system so that payment is now done at depot level. “We will also urge communities to organise themselves at ward level for example, so that we can collect their grain from one spot. All this is to ensure convenience and avoid congestion at depots,” said Mr Mutenha. ZBC News/Business Chronicle