The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter THE Botswana Football Association (BFA) has cleared the air on rumours of discontent surrounding the national team camp ahead of their upcoming Africa Cup of Nations qualifiers against Zimbabwe and Zambia next month. In a statement, BFA denied damning social media reports claiming harassment of national team players currently in camp, racism and maladministration. “(BFA chief executive officer Thabiso) Kebotsamang has assured all football stakeholders that everything is in order within the national team camp, with players and coach amicably working together as they prepare to lift the country’s flag high by yearning for six-points in the upcoming 2022 Africa Cup of Nations qualifiers between Zimbabwe and Algeria next month. “Kebotsamang confirmed that from the initial 30-man provisional squad which was called into camp by head coach Adel Amrouche, only three players have thus far left camp due to various reasons known to the BFA. The three are Lesenya Ramoraka of Orapa United, Tshepo Maikano and Mishani Thupa from Gaborone United. Kebotsamang explained that Ramoraka and Thupa left due to injuries,” read the BFA statement. “He came to be assessed by our national team doctor as the coach can pick a player with an injury and assess for a second opinion on their injuries, while Maikano left on personal matters. All I know is that he has assured the technical team he will certainly be happy for the next call up. Regarding allegations that the national team coach prefers to work with expatriates as opposed to locals, Kebotsamang affirmed that as per international practice coaches always choose to bring their own support staff ranging from assistant coach, video analyst and physical trainer, and in Adel’s case he brought in only Baudez, while the rest of the technical team is made up of Batswana.” The association said to solidify and strengthen the national team, a new team manager, Harry Koata, has been appointed. Koata is the Botswana Football League club Masitaoka FC general manager and his role is to primarily act as a liaison between the technical team and the secretariat. Due to no league action, the BFA said it intended having longer camps for the coach to fully assess his squad and hence the next camp is expected to resume on March 1 until they play against Zimbabwe, Zambia and Algeria.