The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Chronicle Reporter
THE First Lady Amai Auxillia Mnangagwa has through her philanthropic Organisation Angel of Hope Foundation donated food to 21 children’s homes in Matabeleland. Ten of the homes are in Bulawayo, five in Matabeleland North and six in Matabeleland South province. The donated groceries include mealie-meal, rice, cooking oil, soap and soya chunks. The First Lady is the country’s health ambassador with a passion for the welfare of children, women and other vulnerable groups. Recently she launched the school feeding programme for school going children to ensure they are well fed and are able to attend classes on full stomachs. Speaking during the handover of the donation yesterday in Bulawayo, Matabeleland North Minister for Provincial Affairs and Devolution Richard Moyo said the donation will go a long way in addressing challenges faced by children’s homes during the Covid-19 pandemic. He called on the business community to complement Government efforts to keep the public institutions afloat and functional despite the challenges. “It is truly my honour, to stand and receive this generous donation on behalf of children’s homes in Bulawayo Metropolitan, Matabeleland North and Matabeleland South provinces. The donation from Her Excellency, the First Lady of the Republic of Zimbabwe through her Angel of Hope Foundation will benefit a total of 21 children’s homes in the three provinces,” said Minister Moyo. “These include 10 Children’s homes in Bulawayo Metropolitan, five in Matabeleland North and six in Matabeleland South. Her untiring efforts are testimony of support of the National Development Strategy (NDS) a successor Plan to the Transitional Stabilisation Programme,” he said. The NDS project acknowledges the importance of effective social protection nets in reducing poverty and vulnerability. Minister Moyo said the empowerment of children’s homes will go a long way in ensuring that children have equal opportunities regardless of their social status. “We call upon all Zimbabweans to emulate this noble gesture by her Excellency and support our children’s homes, no donation is considered small as it can make a marked difference in a child’s life. Amai, we are truly grateful as Matabeleland provinces for your tireless efforts in ensuring that the needs of the vulnerable are well catered for. We have noted with appreciation the various efforts that you are making to empower our children,” said Minister Moyo. A representative of the beneficiaries, Ms Portia Mapako who is a caregiver at Sandra Jones Centre Children’s Home, said the donation will help alleviate many of their challenges. “We are grateful for the gesture and happy that at least the children will have access to food since things can be tough especially during this pandemic. We extend our gratitude to Mama and we know this is not the last time we are going to benefit from her philanthropic works,” said Ms Mapako. — @thamamoe