The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
THE Civil Protection Unit (CPU) in Beitbridge District has started mobilising resources to assist scores of villagers from 51 homesteads whose houses were extensively damaged by heavy rains accompanied by severe storms. The CPU’s focal person from the District Development Coordinator’s (DDC) office, Mr Jahson Mugodzwa, said assessments were ongoing in selected wards. He said the process was being slowed down by the bad state of roads, especially in Beitbridge West Constituency. Mr Mugodzwa said roads linking Masera, Shashe and Swereki were badly damaged and most people in those areas had been cut off from Beitbridge town. “We have engaged a number of partners to help those villagers whose houses were destroyed by heavy rains. So far we have confirmed 51 houses and most of these were built using mud and poles or mud and bricks. “While we put together material to rebuild in some areas, we are going to start by giving the affected people non-food items in the interim,” he said. Mr Mugodzwa said they have assessed infrastructure damage in Nuli, Tshamnanga, Dite, Lutumba, Makavhane and Tshigomele areas. He said in terms of roads, some culverts and small bridges were washed away by heavy rains. The bad state of the roads, he said had adversely affected the efficient distribution of grain under the drought relief programme. An estimated 20 000 households are food insecure in the district. “We will continue making assessment where we can still access. “You will also note that we are making use of our Risk Communication subcommittee to educate the communities on Covid-19 and rainfall related hazards. They have covered a lot of ground and making an impact,” said the official. He warned people including motorists to avoid crossing flooded rivers or any water bodies to avoid unnecessary loss of life. Meanwhile, the police Sub Aqua Unit has called off a search for two men who were swept away in a flooded Umzingwane River in an attempt to save a drowning cow for an R800 reward on Saturday. The police with assistance of community members in Makhakavhule area, about 15km west of Beitbridge town decided to call it a day after searches yielded nothing for three days. The team combed through a 9km stretch that included the confluence of the uMzingwane and Limpopo rivers. Khathutshelo Mudau and Busani Ndou believed to be around 30 years had entered the flooded river in a vain attempt to get R800 for saving a drowning cow. Two people managed to swim to the banks of the river after the mishap. Matabeleland South police spokesperson, Inspector Loveness Mangena said investigations were ongoing.