The Chronicle Government on Friday extended the level 4 National Lockdown by another two weeks as it grapples to contain the Covid-19 pandemic which continues to claim lives daily. More than 1 000 Zimbabweans including Cabinet ministers have succumbed to the devastating pandemic which is causing havoc around the globe. Many countries have been forced to extend lockdowns due to the spike in new Covid-19 infections and deaths. When President Mnangagwa extended the lockdown, he said he fully appreciates the difficulties which come with the lockdown extension but lives must be saved. Government has deferred indefinitely the opening of schools as part of measures to contain the spread of the pandemic. The schools were supposed to open on January 4 and after assessing the situation on the ground, Government decided to defer the opening. Under the stricter lockdown regulations which were announced early last month, all businesses are suspended except for those providing essential services. Gatherings such as churches, weddings, parties and other such gatherings are banned. Bottle stores, bars and restaurants will be closed for the duration of the stringent regime. Businesses providing essential services will operate from 8am to 3pm. The curfew hours are from 6pm to 6am. We urge citizens to play their part in fighting the spread of the pandemic by strictly adhering to the lockdown regulations. We are very cognisant of the suffering people are enduring as result of the lockdown restrictions given that most families’ breadwinners are in the informal sector which is closed during the duration of the lockdown. We need to soldier on and contain the spread of this pandemic. What is encouraging is that the recovering rate which had dropped to as little as 54 percent, has improved to 75 percent and we want it to improve further. We want at this juncture to appeal to Zimbabweans to refrain from engaging in Covid-19 super spreader activities such as partying or gathering at illegal beer drinking outlets such as shebeens and other such spots. We have to forgo some of our liberties in order to save lives and this means a complete change of behaviour. The citizens will party and merry-make once this pandemic, which has disrupted economies around the globe, is dealt with. It should be everyone’s responsibility to fight the spread of the pandemic wherever one is. The second wave of the virus is more vicious and Zimbabwe is already witnessing the effects as evidenced by increased number of infections and deaths. People should confine themselves to their homes as advised by Government and only move when it is necessary to do so.