The Chronicle Yoliswa Dube-Moyo
A SOBER listen to Soul Jah Love’s music beyond the riddims he chanted on gave a clear insight into the life and times of Saul Musaka. Saul grew up a “good for nothing” orphan who could never get anything right. He, at the hands of his relatives, suffered many injustices, was called names and had to fend for himself after they kicked him out. Zimdancehall became his saving grace and maybe an outlet to vent all the pain and suffering he had to endure quite early on. Soul Jah Love’s lyrical prowess was as good as they came and even the likes of the legendary late musician Oliver ‘Tuku’ Mtukudzi could not hide it. He said he listened to Soul Jah Love’s music. It was no mistake he was crowned the “Ghetto King”. His music was relatable and resonated with the lives of those that listened to it and loved him. When Soul Jah Love chanted “Ndini uya uya” back in 2014, he acknowledged and thanked God for promoter, Changara who took him in and nurtured him into the artiste we first knew. He praised himself and said it was only a matter of time before he could make his music and become great. Soul Jah Love immortalised Saul’s past as the one who was known as a low life, thieving witch who stayed strong and rose beyond his circumstances. He was to continue on this trajectory and “Handichabatika” did not hide this. Soul Jah Love described himself as “conquering shumba” whom the ghetto youths crowned king. Nothing could hold him back “ndiriku attacker futi handimbodzora tsvimbo”. But Soul Jah Love was hooked on drugs and had diabetes to deal with. His health condition often slowed him down but “Pamamonya ipapo” he remained. This would become one of his greatest hits which many other musicians adapted into different renditions. Soul Jah Love refused to be defeated. He often sounded ostentatious but self-grounded at the same time. The one who had been despised most of his life had become “Chibaba” who had a huge following. He was confident in his art and despite the emotional abuse he suffered as a child, which could have affected his self-esteem, he was always confident in his music, “zvakadaro ndichingorema”. Many loved “Mwana waSthembeni” despite the fact that he would sometimes boycott shows. They overlooked his drug addiction and turbulent nature. He loved his mother dearly, and wished he could bring her back to life so she could comfort him like she did when he was a young boy. “Dai hupenyu hwaitengwa”, Soul Jah Love, would have bought back his mother’s life. He believed his life would have been better had his mother been around to hold his hand through his struggles. Despite the sadness that almost felt chronic and the unending health issues, Soul Jah Love was a fighter whose art was deeply ingrained in him. He was so sure of his talent and would often verbalise this through self-praise, “hauite hauite”. Much of what he chanted has been adopted by many into colloquial language acceptable on the streets today. Now, that is lexical genius. There was no way Chigunduru could’ve known February 16, 2021 would’ve been the day he breathed his last but he knew “Kana ndafa” a lot of mistruths about him would be said. He guessed right that people would have a lot to say about him after he was gone, and they do. How he let drugs supposedly ruin his life, how he could’ve managed his diabetic condition better, how he could’ve been more serious about his career, why his relationship with Bounty Lisa failed, why he deserved liberation hero status, how his handlers failed to get him rehabilitated and how he was not celebrated enough while he was still alive. At the end of it all, he did not hide his faith in God and never doubted his creative ability. Loss often brings regret. Many will feel they failed him and didn’t appreciate him enough. But we did. We loved and appreciated you mwana waSthembeni. We will tell them Sauro iGaffa, just as you would’ve wanted. Rest easy Makuruwani. – @Yolisswa.