The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
GOKWE South District Civil Protection Unit (CPU) has started evacuating families that are living along river banks and flood-prone areas. This comes as most rivers and dams have been filled to capacity following above normal rains received across the country, leading to some river banks bursting and dam walls collapsing. So far, a family that has been living along Sesame River has since been moved to a temporary shelter while alternative accommodation is being organised. Five more families that are staying along the same river are set to be evacuated. Gokwe South District CPU chairperson, Ms Netsai Mushauri said some families were living as near as 5 meters from the river bank, putting their lives in danger. She said some families were encircled by water bodies with Sesame River on one side and some other tributaries on the other side. “We have so far moved one family that we have provided with tents. There are however, more families that we are seriously considering evacuating from the area as the river banks along Sesame river are collapsing putting their lives in danger,” she said. Chief Nemangwe is looking for alternative accommodation for the evacuated family. “We talked to the families and encouraged them to move to safer areas. Some of the families we could not access them but we are going to carry out an assessment and continue helping the families that are in danger,” said Ms Mushauri. The CPU also facilitated the movement of families that were living in flood-prone areas.
Gokwe is characterised by loose soils. “We have a lot of infrastructure destroyed by the heavy rains. Roads, bridges were the worst affected by the rains,” she said. Among the roads that were affected were Gokwe-Mafungautsi, Gokwe-Chitekete, and Gokwe Manoti among others. “In some instances, we have villagers that were cut out after the roads were destroyed and also bridges swept away by the rains. Villagers end up improvising means to get to Gokwe Centre as vehicles and scotch carts could not get through,” she said. The CPU together with Zimbabwe National Army (ZNA) and District Development Fund (DDF), are however, making frantic efforts to repair the destroyed infrastructure. “So far working together with our partners, we have managed to repair a bridge leading to Mutendi. Many other roads and bridges are also earmarked either for replacement or refurbishment depending on the condition,” said Ms Mushauri.