The Chronicle Yvonne Ncube, Chronicle Reporter
WHILE some orphaned or abandoned children roam the streets, often becoming delinquents, for Nkosilathi Dube (18) of Entumbane suburb in Bulawayo, it’s a different story that evokes empathy. Nkosilathi, a Form Four pupil at Mpopoma High School, has taken on adult-size physical and mental tasks. He plays the inextricably intertwined role of being both a parent and brother to his two siblings aged 13 and eight. His story is just one of the many touching stories of child-headed families in the country that have left most children vulnerable. Sadly, circumstances beyond his control conspired to make him a parent of his younger brothers before his actual time. Nkosilathi earns money through selling home-made floor polish to support his two siblings and pays rent for a room they share in Entumbane. Despite battling keratoconus, an eye disease, the teenager has taken it upon himself to shoulder the responsibility of looking after his younger brothers. Keratoconus is an eye disease which causes blurred vision. It is a progressive eye disease in which the normally round cornea thins and begins to bulge into a cone-like shape. It does not cause total blindness, but, without treatment it can lead to significant vision impairment. Nkosilathi was born with the disease and it has been adversely affecting his studies from a tender age with his vision gradually deteriorating as he gets older. “I had two eye operations in February and June last year and opticians wrote me a prescription stating that normal glasses would not work for me since my eyes are severely damaged. I therefore need contact lenses, but they are expensive and I can’t afford them,” he said. Nkosilathi said while the Higher Life Foundation is assisting him and his siblings with payment of school fees, he still has the sole responsibility of taking care of their daily needs. His father is late while his frail mother lives in Figtree, but Nkosilathi who dreams to be a doctor, opted to live in Bulawayo to get better education. “We lost our father when we were still young and since his death, my mother who stays in Marula in Figtree, has been struggling to fend for us including paying rent. I remember when I was doing Grade Seven, our landlord evicted us and we had to stay in the streets with my siblings for three months,” he said. Buoyed by the desire to live a decent life off the streets, Nkosilathi ventured into making floor polish using wax and paraffin as raw materials. Today, Nkosilathi takes care of his siblings using proceeds from the floor polish making business. “I sell the polish in 400ml containers for R20. I sell the merchandise to individuals and shops in my neighbourhood and that is how I am managing to put a decent meal on the table and paying rentals,” he said. The third child in a family of six started fending for his two younger brothers four years ago after their mother went to stay in Marula. His two elder sisters eloped with their boyfriends to South Africa, and the other sibling, who is married, lives in Harare. Nkosilathi wrote his Grade Seven examination without a roof over his head but attained 10 units. With a silent tear sliding down his cheek as he slowly narrated his ordeal, the undeterred Nkosinathi hopes to achieve his dream of becoming a doctor. “I wish to be a doctor someday and pursue a career path in pathology to be specific. In fact, I believe that is where my strength and passion lies and by the grace of God I will realise that dream and be able to help mankind,” he said. “My two brothers are a great inspiration to me and each time I wake up, they make me smile despite our daily struggles. Despite what we are going through, my desire is to see them grow, eat and go to school like other children.” Nkosilathi said he has assumed the role of a mother and father to his siblings. He appealed to well-wishers to chip in with funds to help him undergo a surgical operation and buy contact lenses which cost more than US$2 000. “I can’t afford to raise that money and I am therefore appealing to well-wishers to help me. My mother is old and frail and she is also struggling. Anyone who wishes to help can contact me on 0774 975 207 or 0719 988 523,” he said. Child-headed households are increasing not only here in Zimbabwe but across the entire African continent mainly due to increased deaths of parents succumbing to HIV and Aids and other diseases. Economic circumstances have made it difficult for families and communities to support the children using traditional supporting mechanism such as the extended family concept. The National Action Plan for Orphans and Vulnerable Children estimates that there are about 50 000 households headed by a child under 18 years in the country. In most remote parts of the country, child headed families face numerous hardships when it comes to accessing food, water, education, shelter and health services. Some find it difficult to get important documents such as identity cards. Stigma has often compounded the problems for them. Various challenges confront child-headed families as they lack parent figures of authority which tends to affect their psychological well-being, their morality and development. They are often open to abuse and exploitation and in some cases lack love, guidance and protection. According to Unicef, most child-headed household studies in Zimbabwe indicate that there were some members of the extended family who would have taken care of the children but were not willing to do so for various reasons. — @SeehYvonne.