The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube/ Nelias Shiri, Chronicle Reporters
FORMER Highlanders Football Club coach, Cosmas Zulu (71) yesterday donated a suit to the 108-year-old grandfather from Tjinjika Village in Bulilima District following an arson attack that resulted in his best suit which he wished to be buried in and all the family’s belongings being burnt. Mr Lewis Phiri and his family were left homeless after all the four huts at their homestead were set ablaze by an angry boyfriend to one of the old man’s grandchildren. Family members could not salvage anything from the burning huts as the alleged assailant Felix Moyo (25) threatened to kill anyone who attempted to enter the burning huts. Moyo is still on the run. Mr Zulu, who is now at Ngezi Platinum as a goalkeepers coach yesterday said he was saddened when he read the story about the old man in yesterday’s Chronicle. He said he was touched to read that the old man had lost his suit that he wanted to be buried in. “I realised that at the end of the story the old man said one of his suits which he wished to be buried in was burnt. I know in our culture some people want to wear their best suits when they pass on so I take it as my social responsibility to donate him these special suits so as to calm his pain he endured through this terrible incident,” said Mr Zulu. He pleaded with people to be kind especially during these hard times brought about by the outbreak of Covid-19 by helping the old man and his family. “Kindness is a language which the dead can hear and a blind can see, so I plead to the people to show some kindness whenever one had problem like what Mr Phiri faced. People should feel proud of old people,” said Mr Zulu. In an interview last week, Mr Phiri said he does not fear death. “I do not know when I will die but I have been on this earth for a long time and when death visits me, I will be ready. I had even prepared my suit that I would be buried in but the fire burnt it. I have to find another suit for my burial,” he said. A number of people both within and outside Zimbabwe have been donating in cash and kind to the family. Last month, a Zimbabwean based in Sweden, Mr Tichaona Maphosa pledged to give the family US$50 every month for a year and last week he sent the money for the first time as promised. Two WhatsApp groups have since been created in Zimbabwe and in South Africa to coordinate and mobilise resources to assist the family. At the moment a two roomed house is under construction, but work is being delayed by shortage of building materials. Mr Derrick Ncube, who is coordinating resources in South Africa and has so far raised R8 700 appealed for more resources to complete the construction work. “We are almost done. We need roofing material and cement to plaster the house both inside and outside. We would love to do more but what the people have donated can go as far as that. But should we get more well-wishers we will definitely do more for the family as they lost everything,” he said. Those who want help the family can also get in touch with the old man’s granddaughter Miss Sibongile Zimande on 0776572691. There is an option to take goods to Chronicle offices located at the corner of 9th Avenue and George Silunduka Street in Bulawayo to be taken to the family. So far, some people have brought clothes and groceries to Chronicle which were delivered to the family last week. Miss Zimande said so far people have sent ZW$8 010.