The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
THE Bulawayo City Council (BCC) yesterday released a 144-hour weekly water shedding programme which will see most suburbs receiving water twice a week. The industry, city centre and mining areas remain exempt from water shedding. The 144-hour weekly water shedding programme is part of the council’s roadmap to normalise water supplies. The local authority is expected to further reduce the water shedding programme to 72-hours per week within the next two weeks while council hopes to have lifted the water shedding by end of next month. The local authority announced last Friday that it is working on easing water shedding following improved inflows into the city’s supply dams. The council said rains that have been received since the beginning of the rain season in October, have improved the city’s supplies. The Town Clerk Mr Christopher Dube said yesterday that taps will be opened twice a week at 5PM closing at 5AM the following day. He said suburbs such as Lochview, Sunninghill, Marlands, Glencoe, Riverside, Manningdale, Willsgrove, Buenavista and Douglasdale will receive water on Monday evening to Tuesday morning and Friday at 5PM to Saturday at 5AM.
Mr Dube said Nkulumane, Nketa, Sizinda, Tshabalala, Bellevue Newtown West, West Somerton and Southwold, Harrisvale, Trenance, Richmond, Sauerstown, Luveve, Magwegwe, Njube Entumbane, Mpopoma, Lobengula, Mabutweni, Iminyela, Pelandaba and Matshobane will receive tap water on Tuesday at 5PM to Wednesday 5AM and Saturday evening to Sunday morning at the same time. The town clerk said Esigodini, Imbizo Barracks, Fortunes Gate, Selbourne Park, Matsheumhlope, Parklands, Khumalo, Queenspark, Suburbs, Mahatshula, Woodville and Kingsdale will receive running water on Wednesday to Thursday and on Sunday to Monday between 5PM and 5AM. Mr Dube said Emganwini, Pumula, Nketa 9, Hillside, Barbourfields, Mzilikazi, Nguboyenja, Makokoba, Cowdray Park, Emakhandeni, Gwabalanda, Fourwinds, Tegela, Romney Park, Paddonhurst, Sunnyside, Morningside, Montrose, Greenhill, Barham Green, Ilanda, Burnside will have taps opened on Thursday to Friday and Sunday to Monday between 5PM and 5AM. He said Mbalabala Barracks and Mzinyathini Irrigation Scheme which receives raw water will have taps opened on Sunday to Monday and Thursday to Friday between 5PM and 5AM. Bulawayo Mayor, Councillor Solomon Mguni has urged residents to continue conserving water despite the good inflows into the city’s supply dams. – @nqotshili