The Chronicle KAIZER Chiefs legend Robson Muchichwa says he would allow any interested club in South Africa to have his son Humphrey Ncube’s signature, including Orlando Pirates. The young Muchichwa is currently playing for Zimbabwean giants Highlanders, popularly known as Bosso. The left-back is the first-born of ‘Mashamplani’ and according to the father, he is ready to play DStv Premiership football. Former Amakhosi crowd favourite Muchichwa was asked how he would feel if Humphrey were to end up at Soweto rivals Pirates. “I don’t have a problem with that. If an opportunity comes at a team like Orlando Pirates, who will say no? Each and every parent will never say no,” Muchichwa told KickOff.com. “It’s one of the biggest clubs in Africa. No one doesn’t want to play for Pirates in Africa, so if he says no it would be a big shock for me. So, for me it’s a yes.” Muchichwa says he understands Chiefs fans would not take kindly to that if it were to happen. “At the end of the day he has to put food on the table. If Chiefs are not going to look for him, let it be. Have you ever heard about players playing for Chiefs but supporting Pirates?” he reminds. “It’s a job at the end of the day, you need to feed your family. He is ready. I mean Highlanders is on the level of Chiefs, Pirates and Sundowns. You can’t be there at Highlanders if you are not ready. If Kaizer Chiefs need him, I would recommend him because he will give them what they need [a left-back].” Muchichwa continues: “I don’t want to choose a team (for him), as long as it’s a team that is going to give him progression you understand. Yes, it’s a dream for every African player to play for a big club you see. “So maybe he would also love to play for the likes of Chiefs and Pirates because he has already set that trend, he is playing for one of the big teams in Africa in Highlanders. “For me my friend I’m glad he started at the right place, remember everything starts at home. So, it’s a good move. I think this is his third season if I’m not mistaken. You know when you are playing for one of the biggest clubs in Africa, it’s an honour you know, For me I’m happy for that. It’s a good step for me. “He is my first-born; he was born back in Zimbabwe. He is a left-back, he is left-footed, he’s got everything you see in me. He is very strong, very skillful, he can go forward, he can come back… everything I used to do my friend,” Muchichwa said. “I’ve watched this boy play and he is a good player. But obviously you can’t compare him to Robson Muchichwa ‘The Great’ (laughs). Maybe as time goes on, but for now, maybe if he can just find the right team here in South Africa, but he’s coming good.” — KickOff 