The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
MATABELELAND South Minister of State for Provincial Affairs and Devolution, Abednico Ncube has said Government is committed to fighting corruption within local authorities. He said corruption and rent seeking activities, especially in local authorities cannot be tolerated and warned land barons that their days are numbered. The minister said syndicates who are in the habit of corruptly parcelling out land risk being arrested and prosecuted. In some areas, the land barons are accused of duping desperate home seekers by illegally selling land. Minister Ncube made the remarks while officiating at the burial of liberation heroine and Zanu-PF Proportional Representation Member of Parliament, Cde Lisa Singo at the Beitbridge district heroes’ acre on Sunday. Cde Singo died on Thursday after collapsing at her home in Tshidixwa suburb before being rushed to a private clinic where she passed on after complaining of high blood pressure. She is reported to have been diabetic. “It is my hope that none of our local authorities (in Matabeleland South) abused their powers by allocating stands in wetlands or in any undesignated places because the Government is ready to deal with anyone found on the wrong side. As the Second Republic, we have zero tolerance to corruption,” said the Minister. He said the recent rains had left a trail of destruction on road infrastructure, public institutions and some communities and the Government had started working on repairing these essential structures. Minister Ncube said although the rains had damaged infrastructure, the positive side was that the country is now expecting a bumper harvest in most areas. “A good harvest will enable the Government to direct funds it was spending on importing food to other development programmes. “In the 2021 budget, a considerable amount of money was allocated to irrigation development, which will see us building on this season’s success,” he said. Minister Ncube said they were looking forward to the establishment of the Zhovhe Irrigation Scheme and the rehabilitation of the Tshikwalakwala Irrigation Scheme.