The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter MATABELELAND North Volleyball Association chairperson Sifiso Buhlungu says they could become a top beach volleyball resort if they exploited the natural beach in their province. The Binga sand beach is located on the Zambezi River between the mountains and Matabeleland North province is believed to be sitting on millions of dollars in untapped tourism opportunities, as the beach is not being utilised. Binga Rural District Council (BRDC) and Zimbabwe National Parks and Wildlife Management Authority (Zimparks) co-manage the place, which lies less than two kilometres down a steep slope from the Binga Aerodrome. Zimbabwe is generally exposed to the formal 6 a-side version of volleyball, but beach volleyball and sitting volleyball are growing in popularity both as recreational and competitive sports. While other provinces have to settle for artificial setups for beach volleyball, Matabeleland North has the privilege of having a natural beach. “We are looking at capitalising on having this natural resource. We are working on the introduction of beach volleyball in the province and the Binga site certainly should make our efforts quite easier. Not every province has this privilege,” said Buhlungu. In respect of the 6 a-side version, Buhlungu said despite frustration that has come with the lengthy period of inactivity,  the association is still focused on expanding the game in the province. The association is working towards the creation of a vibrant league that will feature teams from all the province’s districts. Matabeleland North is currently the only province without a volleyball league. “When sporting activities were halted, we had five men’s and four ladies’ teams in Hwange district. Our next target was Lupane district where there are teams we met that indicated they need our assistance. Our plan, working together with SRC, is to hold tournaments in areas such as Lupane, Binga, Tsholotsho, Nkayi, Umguza and Bubi. That way we will come up with district teams which is vital in improving the game’s standards in the province,” Buhlungu said. – @innocentskizoe