The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
MR Masauso Sakala, a Victoria Falls safari operator whose seven-roomed house was gutted by fire in Mkhosana last month, is short of superlatives to describe his gratitude to local and international well-wishers who have helped him rebuild the structure. All he could say is: “I have never seen such generosity and I don’t know how to thank the community. I didn’t know people were this caring and united.” True to the old IsiNdebele adage that “umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu”, the Victoria Falls community is reciprocating the spirit of Ubuntu that Mr Sakala and his family always exhibit. Sometime early last month a tragedy befell the family when two solar batteries burst and started a fire that burnt everything in the seven-roomed house. Two minor girls who were in the house escaped unhurt and neighbours helped alert the fire brigade which put out the fire, although it was too late as all household property was reduced to ashes. Nine people, that is Mr Sakala (49) who owns Ultimate Fishing Safaris, his wife Mrs Sitshengisiwe Sakala (46), their three daughters and other dependants all aged between three and 24 lived in the house in the CBZ section. Mr Sakala dismissed speculation from a section of residents that the fire was caused by fuel that he kept in the house. “Initially I thought the girls had left a gas tank not properly shut but it turned out that was not the case because the gas tank was not damaged at all. Naturally, it would have burst if the fire started from it. It is not true that there was fuel in the house and that was proved through investigations. We were using solar to charge batteries without a surge controller and I think the batteries got full and exploded in the spare bedroom where the fire started. Curtains caught fire which then spread to all rooms,” he said. Mr Sakala could not give the value of the burnt property but said all seven rooms had been tiled and fully furnished. Residents quickly formed a “Help Sakala Fundraising Committee” comprising Victoria Falls mayor Councillor Somveli Dlamini, Hwange West MP Mr Godfrey Dube, and Victoria Falls Ward 11 Clr Edmore Zhou in whose ward the house is located, and mostly neighbours. The committee began reaching out to the local and outside community seeking assistance with building material, clothes, food, utensils and money. The response was overwhelming. The family was quickly moved to an alternative house secured by the committee to pave way for renovations, a rare development as in most cases victims would remain at the burnt house despite exposure to health hazards. The zinc roofing sheets were badly damaged while roof trusses were reduced to charcoal and some of the walls were condemned by the Victoria Falls City buildings inspector and had to be demolished. A news crew visited the house and witnessed some residents volunteering their labour to reconstruct the house. Committee secretary Ms Namakau Mubita, who is also Victoria Falls Combined Residents Association organising secretary, said the situation caused by Covid-19 inspired the Victoria Falls community to help the Sakalas. “We just felt we should form a committee of residents and neighbours. Mr Sakala’s neighbour Mr Cosmas Moyo is the chairman. We sent appeals through WhatsApp groups and the response was overwhelming both from Victoria Falls residents and companies as well as around Zimbabwe, regionally and internationally. “Some provided building material, clothes, food and money while residents volunteered to provide labour. The whole community was touched, seeing that someone who is into tourism had lost everything at a time when industry is closed because of Covid-19. There are also minor children who need shelter and food. This is what moved everyone to want to help and it has set a precedence in Victoria Falls. This is a lesson learnt and we wish to do this for others,” she said. Clr Dlamini commended the community and international well-wishers. “This is a great gesture by our community and it shows that we live as one. We hope it will remain like this so we live in harmony and respect for each other,” he said. The MP, Mr Dube, said the whole nation can pluck a leaf from Victoria Falls. “We appreciate what the community has done. This is an example to learn from even as a nation that when an unfortunate incident occurs we should put our differences aside and help each other. This shows that we are a small united community and we should be able to do things together,” said Mr Dube.— @ncubeleon