The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
FORMER lightweight boxer Johannes Jiyane says the standards of boxing have plummeted to alarming levels in the past decade. Tshaka Youth Centre, Iminyela, Isinga, Sizinda and Stanley Square were popular for hosting quality boxing bouts in the past. In fact, Stanley Square was the home of all boxing in Bulawayo, with most tournaments being staged at the Makokoba located venue. Despite a number of talented pugilists emerging from the amateur boxing ranks, very few turned professional, with a huge number being lost due to failure to secure sponsorship. While amateur boxing is active, with several tournaments being held mostly at Sizinda Beer Hall, boxers showing a lot of promise end up quitting as prospects of turning professional are slim. Jiyane, a former national team captain, said: “In terms of boxing the standards have dropped. The sport is no longer at the standard it used to be largely because politically we have been shut out. “During our time we used to be part of the Commonwealth and we used to trade leather with boxers from countries who were part of the bloc. When we left the Commonwealth, movements to some of these countries became difficult. That did not help the sport as it also saw some sponsors backing off.” Jiyane said investing in grassroots development is key to reviving boxing in the country. “Sport is not for the old people which is why we have to develop athletes from the grassroots level. If you impart knowledge to them while they are young, they grow to become stars. The children are there and schools are avenues for the sport to improve. Schools have the right to open boxing clubs, which is good for the sport. “With this system we can have every school starting a boxing club and when we train these kids from a young age, they can grow to become greats. There is need for courses and workshops for teachers so that they turn these sport codes into practical courses for kids at a tender age,” said Jiyane. The veteran boxer believes boxing has the potential to find its feet if serious sponsors come on board. — @innocentskizoe