The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter FC Platinum have received a major boost ahead of their Caf Confederation Cup campaign on Valentine’s Day when the veteran trio of forwards Donald Teguru, Rodwell Chinyengetere and defender Blessing Moyo received international transfer certificates (ITC). Pure Platinum Play take on Senegalese side Jaraaf in the play-offs at the National Sports Stadium on Sunday before flying to Dakar for the return leg set for February 21. The duo of former Dynamos defender Moyo, 2017 and 2018 Soccer Star of the Year winner Chinyengetere were with Real Stars and Baroka FC under the South African Football Association (Safa), while Teguru was registered with the Football Association of Zambia as a Buildcon player. Teguru’s registration papers for the Caf Confederation Cup play-offs have already sailed through while those of Chinyengetere and Moyo are expected anytime soon. “Donald’s papers are done; we are now waiting for Caf regarding to Chinyengetere and Moyo,” said FC Platinum spokesperson Chido Chizondo. Speaking from their bio-bubble base in Harare, FC Platinum coach Norman Mapeza said they were excited following the clearance of the three, who have been busy with hard training alongside their new teammates. “As you know that we have been here since Wednesday last week partly to concentrate on our preparations and partly in line with Covid-19 health protocols and guidelines which requires us to go into a 10-day closed camp before our matches, all has been going well since then. “We are also happy that the three guys have received their international clearances now. They are still good and look set to add value to the squad. Yes, some minor fitness issues might affect them, but I am sure our guys will push them to make sure they’ll be in right shape,” said Mapeza, who was in charge when the Zvishavane-based side made their debut Caf Confederation Cup appearance in 2015. Other survivors from that sojourn include goalkeeper and captain Petros Mhari, defenders Gift Bello and Raphael Muduviwa.