The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
The PPC Zimbabwe Music awards virtual show, held on Saturday which were marred by technical glitches saw Cool Crooners given the Lifetime Achievement Award and Busi Ncube the Zim Icon Award. During the awards Zimdancehall artiste Jah Master, Janet Manyowa and Holy Ten led the roost with two gongs each. It was a befitting recognition for Busi Ncube and Cool Crooners for their hard work and consistency since their heydays, and were celebrated while they are still alive. Cool Crooners have been in the industry for over 30 years and are famously known for their hit song Bhulugwe Lami. The trio comprising of George Salimu, Lucky Thodhlana and Abraham Ncube said:
“Truly speaking this is the greatest surprise and honour that has happened in our lives. “We appreciate each and every one who believe in what we are doing since way back in the days.” The Lifetime Achievement Award rewards the contributions made by the musician towards the development and advancement of the Zimbabwean music industry. Overall, for a year where the new normal became popular through online shows which Holy Ten largely used, he was named Best Newcomer and Best Hip-Hop artiste while Janet Manyowa scooped the Best Female and Best Album for the Year for the project Sounds of Victory. The artistes who kept people up in a good mood amid the pandemic, Poptain and Allanah through the track Fadza Mutengi and Jah Master through his Hello Mwari hit won Best Collaboration for the former and Best Male and Song of the Year for the latter. BET award winner Sha Sha came guns blazing once again as she was named Best International Artist while her South African based counterpart Nox took the Best Afro pop gong. Indosakusa (Best Covid-19 song) from their melodious and soulful song titled Covid-19. The song describes deeply the effects of the deadly virus that has killed millions globally. For his always on-point creative picturesque visuals Vusa “Blaqs” Hlatshwayo was named Best Videographer while Asambeni, an Amapiano track that Mzoe 7 released last year made him take the Best Dance/House/Kwaito gong. Madlela Skhobokhobo took the Best Tshibilika award and that may be attributed to the i50 Duuu comical track while unstoppable duo Crisswiss and The Dot who won Zim Hip hop Best Group also won Best Group at the Zima’s. Nkwali took home the Best Ezodumo/Imbube award while Charles Mahlaba won the Best Jazz gong. Managing to host the fete under lockdown, PPC Zima chief executive officer Reason Sibanda apologised for the technical glitches and thanked the nation for supporting them. “We would like to apologise for the interruption of the production. Our service providers had technical difficulties that were beyond their control. Thank you for your support,” said Sibanda.