The Chronicle The Global Esports Federation (GEF) has announced the commissions that will be given responsibility for continuing the organisation’s work in 2021. Ten GEF Commissions and two Advisory Councils will be led by members of the GEF board, with contributions from world-leading experts from the esports and sports communities, corporate governance, technology, and business sectors, the GEF says. The commissions will help guide the GEF in fulfilling its mission to promote the credibility, legitimacy, and prestige of esports, and in developing a safe, healthy and sustainable esports ecosystem. The Singapore-based GEF was launched in December 2019, with Chinese technology conglomerate Tencent a founding partner. “The Global Esports Federation will continue to draw on a diverse range of experience and expertise from the world’s esports and sporting communities,” said GEF president Chris Chan. “I trust that the GEF Commissions and all appointed members will play an active role in advising the GEF board and facilitating the dynamic work and development in convening the world’s esports community.” The panels include Athletes, Players, Community Commission, the Brand, Marketing, Commercial, Communications Commission and the Governance, Ethics and Membership Commission. An International Federations Advisory Council and Publishers and Developers Advisory Council have also been approved for 2021, while there is also a Coordination Commission for the inaugural Global Esports Games. “These important commissions drive the evolution of the organisation,” said Tommy Ganda Sithole, GEF vice-president and chair of the Governance, Ethics and Membership Commission. “We have assembled more than 120 commission members representative of the community whom we serve, convene, and collaborate with. The commissions are a driving force within the GEF and a central point of our organisational governance structures,” he said. The Olympic Council of Asia, World Taekwondo, the Commonwealth Games Federation and Sports Innovation Lab are among the organisations the GEF has entered into agreements with since being established 13 months ago, as it has sought to position itself as the global governing body for esports. The International Esports Federation (IESF), founded in 2008, has operated by enrolling national federations rather than signing deals with Olympic sports, and now has 100 members. – Insidethegames.biz