The Chronicle INDIA-Australia 2020-21 was unforgettable and a reminder of Test cricket’s charm. The traditional format’s protracted length, which often seems so out of place in modern life, fuels the tension. Only now there is an added sprinkle of T20 dynamism and dare ensuring the very best elements of the formats are fusing as evidenced during that magical month in Australia. Amid red ball fever after India’s incredible heist in Brisbane, traditionalists, almost condescendingly, were quick to exult Test cricket endlessly. To be fair, it was quite hard to stomach watching the subsequent Big Bash League, which felt gimmickry and a knock off by comparison. Test cricket might well be unparalleled but its future is murky beyond cricket’s superpowers India, England and Australia. After so much attention, and mammoth television ratings, there is already a push to add a fifth Test to the next Australia-India series. This powerful trio already play each other on a loop, which might be all some fans want, but Test cricket’s depth is fragile stoking fears the format is inevitably destined to be played among a handful of teams. In the final never-jangling moments at the Gabba, Zimbabwe and Afghanistan’s administrators were desperately trying to salvage a two-Test series originally set for Oman even knowing the dire financial ramifications. For these countries and many more, dreaming of one day conjuring their own long format classics, Test cricket represents a black hole. “We do lose a lot of money — about $300 000-$400 000, to host a Test series. It’s money we don’t have,” Zimbabwe Cricket (ZC) chairman Tavengwa Mukuhlani told me. “Test cricket represents the traditions and culture of cricket. But it comes with a heavy financial burden for nations like ourselves. “The challenge is to try and balance the cricket outcomes that we expect to get out of Test cricket and the commercial outcomes that underpin our survival.” Test cricket can be propped up in India, Australia and England through huge domestic broadcasting rights deals worth billions respectively. ZC has a minuscule deal in comparison of around $3 million over four years with Sony. ZC, like most other cricket countries bar the elite, rely on their slice of the International Cricket Council’s (ICC) pie, which still heavily favours India despite a reduction after an adjustment in 2017. Zimbabwe receives $94 million in the ICC’s current cycle from 2016-23, compared to India’s $405 million and England’s $139 million. “We know our place in world cricket and plan and budget around that,” Mukuhlani said. “But we need more money if we are to play Test cricket. Our TV rights are reflective of our opportunities.” Zimbabwe, along with recent Full Members Afghanistan and Ireland, are not part of the new World Test Championship aimed to help revitalise and provide more context for the long format. “The ICC needs a plan for these three countries. If we can’t play Test cricket then it’s just symbolic (having the status),” Mukuhlani said. The world powers have little incentive for the ilk of Zimbabwe, who have not played India, England or Australia in Tests for more than 15 years. Rescheduling their postponed ODI tour of Australia, originally scheduled for last August, is currently under discussion with ZC’s chiefs hoping to squeeze in a T20 series too. And Tests?
“Won’t happen,” Mukuhlani chuckles almost dismissively noting that Zimbabwe have not played Tests against Australia since late 2003. “Hopefully in the next cycle (2023-31).” Amplified by the financial tumult of the pandemic, there is a prevailing fear that Australia, India and England will play each other even more. “World cricket is stronger when we all play each other. I do appreciate commercial realities but there must be a fair balance,” Mukuhlani said. There have been proposals over the years aimed at safeguarding the format’s future beyond a few well-heeled boards. As part of the much-reviled ‘Big Three’ financial takeover in 2014, a Test Cricket Fund was setup to help the seven other Full Member nations at the time with two biannual payments totalling more than $1 million. But the fund, which aimed to “encourage and support Test match cricket” outside India, England and Australia, was scrapped amid an overhaul of the financial model in 2016-17. Amid the revamp, the smaller cricket countries receive more overall but there isn’t dedicated remuneration towards developing Test cricket. Priorities for most boards have shifted to the growth engine of cricket, the T20 format, nsuring there is little prospect of Test cricket expanding. Associate powerhouses Oman, the Netherlands and U.S. want to become Full Members but don’t have Test ambitions, which had been key in attaining the highest membership. There is a prevailing feeling that Test cricket is inevitably destined to be reduced to four of five countries. “It’s already heading that way,” an ICC board member recently told me. “The ICC must make a decision which format to hold up as defining the sport and its future, Tests or T20?” Some administrators want the Test Cricket Fund to be revived through, somehow, a new ICC revenue stream and not carved up through their board’s existing share of the ICC’s financial pot. “We are the least developed country in cricket and we still have war in this country, which affects all aspects of our cricket,” new Afghanistan chief Rahmatullah Qureishi told me. “We need funding from the ICC and also for the elite teams to play us.” Afghanistan’s historic one-off Test against Australia set for Perth late last year was postponed much to the chagrin of their power-brokers after seeing India’s highly lucrative tour Down Under completely salvaged. “All three formats are equally important to us. We have potential as a Test nation,” Qureishi said. “We believe we can be a top three country in the world one day.” “Test funding would go a long way for us,” concurred Mukuhlani, the Zimbabwe chief. “If we play regularly, there is no reason we can’t improve and be like New Zealand — a small but successful Test cricket nation.” In the meantime, Mukuhlani, Qureishi and many other administrators have to grapple with the grim reality. “We are hosting Ireland and Afghanistan this year. They’re loss making series for us,” Mukuhlani said. “It’s very difficult. We know we are digging a hole.” — Forbes.com