The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter CAF A coaching licence holders are due for refresher courses, with Zifa technical director Wilson Mutekede revealing that they had applied to hold Caf licence courses. Mutekede said indications are that the continental football governing body will give them the green light to offer the Caf-A refresher course first. He said Caf A, B and C coaching badges expire every two years, meaning all Zimbabwe’s PSL coaches will be heading back to class. Zimbabwe last held a Caf A course in 2017. “We’re waiting for Caf to approve a refresher course for the Caf A coaching licence. You might be aware that badges expire every two years, meaning we have to hold refresher courses every two years. Once Caf responds with the dates, we’ll notify coaches,” said Mutekede. He could not be drawn into stating whether the courses will be held online or not. “How we progress will depend on the health protocols provided by authorities. Caf will also advise us on how we will conduct the courses,” said Mutekede. Zimbabwe has four Caf certified instructors, Triangle United coach Tawurayi Mangwiro, Nelson Matongorere from Caps United, former Zifa technical director Maxwell Jongwe and Mutekede. Unlike in the past when Zifa chose coaches to participate in Caf courses, the continental body will now shortlist participants using CVs that would have been attached. Coaches will apply online to be admitted for the courses. Zimbabwe last held a Caf A course in January, 2017, the same year that standardisation of coaches was implemented, affecting a number of Caf B badge holders, as they could no longer coach in the Premier Soccer League. Standardisation of coaches meant Premiership gaffers and their trainers had to be in possession of a Caf A badge, with a Caf B licence being a minimum requirement for First Division coaches. Division One assistant coaches are required to be holders of a Caf C or Zifa Level 4 licence. In the Second Division, a coach should have a Caf C licence while his understudies are required to have a Level 3 qualification as a minimum standard. The coaching standards also cascaded down to Division Three, tertiary institutions and schools. For secondary schools, a Zifa Level 2 badge became mandatory, while primary school football coaches should be holders of a Level 2 certificate. — @ZililoR