The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
Amapiano hit, Emathandweni has sold gold in South Africa and the woman behind the track, DJ Zandimaz is elated saying she is not stopping and eyes the record going platinum. The song, featuring renowned vocalist Nokwazi, was released last year and has been given heavy rotation on radio stations and international music stations. The music video also reached three million views on YouTube. Nokwazi celebrated selling gold through a message on her Instagram account to her over 30 000 followers. “Thank you so much we have reached Gold and thank you @zandimazz for trusting me babe,” she said. DJ Zandimaz (real name Zandile Mazithulela) said she was eyeing selling platinum next. “My distribution company, Nyce Entertainment confirmed that the record has sold gold, meaning it has sold over 500 000 online. Just that I got gold it doesn’t mean that’s the end. To me it’s the beginning, from here we are going platinum. I want it to sell one million. We aren’t stopping, going beyond the stars, I’m going for everything. This is an encouragement for me to actually go harder and try to inspire more,” said DJ Zandimaz. She thanked God, her family, friends and fans for the support. “I’m so grateful to God, I wouldn’t have come this far it wasn’t for God. I’m a very strong believer of God and I always try put Him first in what I do. My parents, family, friends and support from fans, if it wasn’t for them, I wouldn’t have achieved this. I plan not to disappoint,” said DJ Zandimaz. The Esigodini-born and Bulawayo-bred wheel spinner said the achievements of the song were astonishing her every day. “This song is turning out to be doing the most. I genuinely didn’t think that it would. The first time I heard someone’s song went gold, was when Zahara released her song, Loliwe and everyone went crazy, about how Zahara went gold. Then here I am my first song, my first every baby which is gold. I’m so humbled,” said DJ Zandimaz.− @bonganinkunzi