The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma recently in West Nicholson
HEAVY rains which have been experienced in the past week in parts of Matabeleland South Province and countrywide have undercut Mbembesi River bridge making it dangerous to humans and vehicles passing through it. The Beitbridge-Bulawayo highway has also not been spared as it is now filled with alarming potholes. On Friday at around 11PM Mbembesi River bridge was closed after a section of water stoppage rocks at the bridge were swept away. The bridge is built in thick pillar designs with one of the pillars that is at the river located at the side of Mbembesi Growth Point in West Nicholson having been damaged due to incessant rains. Only one way flow of traffic was opened Saturday at around 6AM, with traffic having mounted on both ends as the road leads to the busiest border post in the Southern African region, the Beitbridge Border Post. The single lane is being used in order to avoid further damage to the bridge that creates easy flow of essential cargo. The road is vital not just to locals in Gwanda District but also to the entire country and neighbouring countries like South Africa, Zambia and Mozambique as it is used to transport goods and services from Beitbridge to towns and cities such as Gwanda, Bulawayo, Gweru, Victoria Falls, Gweru, Harare, Mutare, Lusaka in Zambia, Maputo in Mozambique, Pretoria and Johannesburg in South Africa among other places. The route is shorter and makes business sense to use for ferrying goods and services to the above towns and cities. Chronicle visited the bridge on Saturday at around 10AM and observed that police officers were controlling vehicular and human traffic across the bridge. Workers from the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructural Development and villagers from the area were assessing the damage to the bridge. A worker who spoke on condition of anonymity said: “We had no option but to close the bridge yesterday (Friday) evening and this was met with mixed feelings from motorists. “Some demanded to pass but we held firm to our decision and the bridge reopened one lane in the morning after having assessed the danger and need to ensure goods and services supply is not interpreted,” said the worker. A beverages vendor at West Nicholson who was defying lockdown regulations of closure of informal businesses identified as Mai B said total closure of the bridge would have posed a big challenge to the local community that is backed by the mining sector. “We rely on business to and fro across the bridge and as the local community it will be a big setback for any business operations to take place. “This is so as the river is also unaccesible on foot as water has not subsided thus putting our lives and that of the small-scale miners on pause,” said Mai B. In a telephone interview, Matabeleland South Provincial road engineer, Engineer Joseph Makokove said renovations have started. He said the bridge will be closed daily in adherance to curfew hours till renovation works have been completed. “The contractor has already mobilised to be on site and repair works are in motion. “The bridge is closed as from 6pm-6am everyday till we finish the works in order to avoid any fatalities at night and protect motorists,” he said. Meanwhile, the Beitbridge-Bulawayo highway has been dilapidated due to incessant rains and no repair mechanisms being put in the past year. From Bulawayo one is met with potholes that are disturbing easy flow of traffic at places that include Kensington, Esigodini, Mbalabala, Mtshabezi turn off, Nsindi, Mopane, Collen Bawn and West Nicholson, among other places. The damage is causing vehicle breakdowns, tyre separation and at times accidents. A Gwanda motorist Mr Herbert Ncube criticised the Zimbabwe National Road Administration (Zinara) for failing to repair roads yet has been increasing tollgate fees. Last week, Zinara gave the greenlight for motorists to pay tollgate fees in foreign currency and hiked toll fees in local currency. The new system came to effect as Zinara implemented Statutory Instrument (SI) 32 of 2021. According to SI 32 of 2021 light vehicles will pay US$2, minibuses US$3, buses US$4, heavy vehicles US$5 and haulage trucks US$10. “Just a few weeks back I was coming from Beitbridge and my tyre had a separation due to the potholes that are all over the highway. “Zinara is not doing us any justice considering that they are hiking tollgate fees but failing to repair roads,” said Mr Ncube. However, in a telephone interview, Zinara spokesperson Mr Tendai Mugabe said they are not in charge of the Beitbridge-Bulawayo highway road maintenance. “As Zinara our job is to collect tollgate fees and forward them to the Transport Ministry who then deal with the contractor obligated to ensure viable roads are in place,” said Mr Mugabe. — @mthabisi_mthire