The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Court Reporter PRESIDENT Mnangagwa has extended his condolences to the family of the late Harare High Court judge Justice Clement Phiri, saying his death is a huge blow to the country’s justice delivery system and the legal fraternity. Justice Phiri was among the group of 46 candidates who participated in the first ever public interviews for judges in Zimbabwe under the 2013 Constitution. In his condolence message, President Mnangagwa said he learnt with great sadness and disbelief upon receiving the news of Justice Phiri’s death. “On behalf of Government, my family and on my behalf, I wish to express my heartfelt condolences to Justice Phiri’s family, especially his wife Mpho and the children, the judiciary and the legal fraternity who have lost a loving husband, father, professional colleague,” he said. The President said Justice Phiri was one of the best brains on the High Court bench whose death created a deep gap that will be difficult to fill. “His passing on has dealt a huge blow to the legal fraternity in general and to our justice delivery system in particular which counted on his invaluable membership and wealth of experience in jurisprudence,” he said. “In Justice Phiri, our country has lost a quiet and dignified judge and is all the poorer for losing one of its best brains sitting on the High Court bench. His death has created a deep chasm in the High Court circuit that will be very difficult to fill.” Born on June 24, 1960, Justice Phiri studied law at the University of Zimbabwe. After completing his legal studies, he briefly worked in the then Ministry of Local Government, Rural and Urban Development, before going into private practice as a legal practitioner in 1986. In 2004 he became an Advocate, a position he held until he was appointed a judge of the High Court of Zimbabwe on September 16, 2015 along with four other judges Justices Jester Helena Charewa, Tawanda Chitapi, Davison Moses Foroma, Nyaradzo Priscilla Munangati-Manongwa and Edith Kuda Mushore. He is survived by his wife, Mrs Mpho Phiri, and his children Mario, Palesa, Felistas and Dimpho. Mourners are gathered at Number 36 Roosevelt Crescent, Winston Park in Marondera. Funeral arrangements will be announced in due course. @mashnets