The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
ARTISTES from Matabeleland region were spot-on at the virtual PPC Zimbabwe Music Awards (Zima) 2021 as they walked away with nine gongs from 28 categories. Chronicle Showbiz interviewed a number of the Matabeleland region artistes who all reiterated gratitude for their hard work being recognised. Jazz muso Charles Mahlaba who managed to clinch his first ever award in Best Jazz said: “What a wow. I’m so excited and pleased to have been honoured with this award as it means a lot in my career. “This was my second nomination at Zima after last year and I thank God for this recognition. I’ll continue to keep working hard and releasing unique music for the people.” Also winning his first Zima award in the Best Dance/House/Kwaito, Mzoe 7 said he now aims for a National Art Merit Award. “I’m humbled by this national acknowledgement and I don’t know how to express myself as I finally won a Zima. “Special shout-out to all the people I worked with and everyone who has supported team Mzoe 7. There is actually more good works coming. Let’s go for Nama now.” Madlela Skhobokhobo said winning the award in Best Tshibilika shows that a dream never dies. “Winning a Tshibilika award for me is always very special because no one gave me a chance. Remember I don’t have a proper background in music but somehow God put me into it because of the experimental song Samamoe and the journey started there.” “Even growing up I did not dance to Tshibilika as where I grew up it was always Pansula so for me today to be taking Tshibilika awards is very special. Indeed, a dream never dies,” he said. Indosakusa: The Morning Star founder, Oscar Siziba said they were looking forward to winning the Best Covid-19 song. “This song showed us the light because firstly last year this song made it in the charts in South African Imbube music on uKhozi Fm and it became the Best Song of the Year in United Kingdom (Radio 54) African Panorama. “The song went on to clinch a BAA and was nominated in Tesma Awards.” Contemporary artiste, Nkwali (real name Nomathamsanqa Mkwananzi) dedicated the award in Best Ezodumo/Imbube to her late father, Charles Themba Mkwananzi who died in 2018. “I want to thank the organisers and the sponsors for considering me and the other nominees and winners hence I am giving a very big shout-out to them because gratitude left unsaid does no one any good. “My heart is full of joy; my eyes are filled with tears both of joy and pain because of this award and I am dedicating this award to my dad.”