The Chronicle THE FATHER of Liverpool goalkeeper Alisson Becker has died after his body was found in a lake near the family home. Local police have told Brazilian media that Jose Agostinho Becker, 57, is believed to have drowned after disappearing near a dam. Jose is understood to have gone for a swim near his property in Lavras do Sul, in southern Brazil. After he was declared missing, a friend of his and an employee of the family estate discovered the body on Wednesday evening. Police arrived on the scene and his death is being treated as an accident. Like his two sons, Liverpool’s Alisson, 28, and Fluminense’s Muriel, 34, Jose was a goalkeeper. He played in amateur leagues in Brazil, as did Alisson’s grandfather, and has been described as a huge influence on his sons’ careers. Tributes have been paid from around the footballing world. His club Liverpool wrote on their website: “Liverpool FC is deeply saddened by the tragic death of Alisson Becker’s father, Jose, in Brazil on Wednesday. “The thoughts of everybody at the club are with Alisson and the Becker family at this incredibly sad and difficult time. “The club requests that the media respects the privacy of Alisson and his family during this time.” Muriel’s club Fluminense wrote in a statement: “Fluminense deeply regrets the death of Jose Agostinho Becker, father of goalkeepers Muriel and Alisson. We wish all friends and family all the strength.” Like their dad, both Alisson and Muriel Becker are goalkeepers Brazilian club Sao Paulo said: “With much regret, Sao Paulo receives the sad news of the death of Jose Agostinho Becker, father of goalkeepers Alisson and Muriel. Our condolences and solidarity with the two athletes and their families. A lot of strength and a lot of light to them in this moment.” Fellow Serie A side Chapecoense wrote: “We deeply regret the passing of Jose Agostinho Becker, father of goalkeepers Alisson and Muriel.⁣ All our solidarity and the most sincere desire for strength so that athletes and their families can overcome this difficult moment.” Internacional, where both Alisson and Muriel began their careers, stated: “It is with great sadness that we received the news of Jose Agostinho Becker’s death, the father of our ex-goalkeepers Alisson and Muriel.” The club is based in Porto Alegre and the family hail from the Novo Hamburgo region to the north of the city. Upon signing from Roma in 2018, Premier League and Champions League winner Alisson explained his family heritage between the posts. — The Sun