The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
Beitbridge Municipality has entered into a partnership with the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) in a programme that will improve the capacity of the local authority in solid waste management. Chronicle understands that as part of the programme, IOM is sponsoring the mounting of 150 street bins along major roads and business centres used by close to 13 000 travellers who pass through the town daily. Beitbridge Municipality’s director of environmental and health services, Mr Pio Muchena said the initiative was being rolled out under their Water and Sanitation Health (WASH) facility targeting hotspot areas frequented by migrants. He said besides the bins, IOM had also donated five water tanks with a combined carrying capacity of 25 000 litres, which have since been mounted at strategic places around the town. “The programme is meant to address some of the challenges we experienced in the last few weeks. There was too much littering as many roads were congested with vehicles as people crossed into either South Africa or Zimbabwe through Beitbridge Border Post,” said Mr Muchena. “When IOM came on board, we then mapped all the littering red zones and realised we need a total of 150 street bins and so far, we have mounted 75 in the CBD and the Highway leading to Bulawayo and Harare.” He said they were going to mount more bins around Dulivhadzimu long-distance bus terminus and the business centre and at Engen service stations, which are frequented by the migrant population daily. Mr Muchena said each of the five water tanks had a carrying capacity of 5 000 litres had been mounted and fitted with tapes at selected places. These include Dulivhadzimu Business Centre, near the entrance to the border post, at Engen service station at the Nssa quarantine centre and near the Roman Catholic Centre. “Access to clean water is one important aspect of managing the Covid-19 pandemic, hence these water tanks have been strategically located to cater for all the migrant population passing through Beitbridge town,” said Mr Muchena. He said the local authority will keep courting more partners to address issues of solid waste management. At the moment, the town is producing 1 200 tonnes of litter per month with the local authority only managing to collect at least 700 tonnes. Mr Muchena said they had also trained 210 residents from six wards on proper solid waste management. These are from six clubs with a membership of 35 people each. “These are active on the ground and have proved to be effective since they also police residents where littering is concerned. They were trained under the Christian Care WASH programme. “In addition, we have engaged waste recycling groups and companies to come on board and this has contributed to us maintaining a healthy and safe environment,” he said. Mr Muchena said they had engaged construction companies and land developers to help with excavations at the new site where the local authority intends to build a modern landfill. The current landfill in the town which was built in the 1970s has reportedly outlived its lifespan. Meanwhile, IOM has also sponsored the installation of barricades and social distance markings in the main immigration hall to complement ongoing efforts to contain the spread of Covid-19 at ports of entry. — @tupeyo