The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
PRESIDENT Mnangagwa has directed the Ministry of National Housing and Social Amenities, along with other relevant ministries, departments and agencies to immediately identify suitable areas for human habitation in the wake chaotic and unplanned illegal settlements in rural and urban areas. Lately, land barons have been illegally parcelling out residential and commercial stands, especially on wetlands with Government crafting tough legislation to decisively deal with the culprits. Furthermore, the President said the Environmental Management Agency (EMA) should also identify and designate all wetlands around the country as unsuitable spaces for human settlements. He said boundaries marking rural and urban land must be enforced or redrawn according to relevant laws. Deforestation and the destruction of wetlands in Zimbabwe has led to the damaging of homes, roads and crops in parts of Chimanimani, Chipinge, Buhera, Gweru, Masvingo, Chiredzi, Harare, Chitungwiza and Matabeleland South. Addressing the nation yesterday, President Mnangagwa said the redress of the undesirable and worrisome situation is being urgently and decisively undertaken across all local authorities. He lashed out at urban local authorities for failing to address the issue. “Government is however, deeply concerned with the illegal expansive construction in wetlands and river basins as well as the construction of houses without the provision of requisite infrastructure such as roads, water, sewer and electricity. The current excellent rains received across the country have exposed and laid bare the extent of the associated problems in unplanned settlements in our urban, peri-urban and growth points,” he said. “Henceforth the relevant ministries are being constituted into working groups that will focus on social service delivery as well as arresting the negative impact of the chaotic, unplanned illegal settlements in growth points, towns and cities.” President Mnangagwa said alternative spaces have to be urgently identified and developed for relocation of families with houses built on wetlands and other undesignated areas. “This approach has been resourced so that every province, district, ward or suburb in our country, in both urban and rural areas experience quality social services and increased economic opportunities. The Ministry of National Housing and Social Amenities, along with other ministries, departments and agencies must immediately identify such areas and ascertain the quantum of affected households,” he said. An update from the UN International Organisation of Migration (IOM) and the Civil Protection Unit shows that 9 661 homes were destroyed or damaged in the country as at January 27, showing the gravity of the impact of wetlands destruction and climate change. The President said the current agriculture season is promising to result in a bumper harvest and food self-sufficiency, with provinces having received above normal rainfall. “Inflow to major dams has been good with some reaching full capacity. This in turn positively impacts our irrigation potential in the coming seasons,” he said. President Mnangagwa said Government stands ready to strengthen the confidence of investors and businesses alike.
“We are also consolidating our export and bilateral investment promotion strategies given the enhanced economic integration under the Africa Continental Free Trade Area. The momentum witnessed in the past few years which saw increased local capacity utilisation and optimal production and productivity across all sectors, must continue,” he said. The President said ministries and agencies are available to facilitate the convenient flow of trade and exports which will ultimately benefit our people and the nation as a whole. “My administration will continue along the path of a balanced budget and a balanced economy which gives due attention to all areas of our economy and society. This will be consistently informed by the principles of equalisation and devolved development, which has so far led to transformation of the social and infrastructure landscape in our rural areas,” he said. On the international relations front, President Mnangagwa said Zimbabwe is committed to remain a good neighbour to all and making a positive contribution within the comity of nations, for a better world. “In the spirit of multilateralism and guided by the ideals of the United Nations Charter, we will esteem and extend mutual respect to all nations. Our country in turn expects the same from other members of the global community, as we together advance sustainable economic growth, democracy and a more peaceful world,” he said. The President said since the advent of the Second Republic, his administration has strived to establish a culture of hard honest work, unity of purpose among the many different interests in the nation. “We are indeed diverse but one. Now we can proudly say that we are stronger together in the midst of many challenges from the economy, to droughts, cyclone and now this pandemic. Our experiences have toughened us should indeed embolden us for the tasks that are ahead towards building a prosperous nation,” he said “Let our spirits not be dampened or deterred by sideshows. We are writing our history and charting our own course. Success and the realisation of the vision for economic growth, prosperity, development, modernisation and a better quality of life for all our people, is on the horizon.” President Mnangagwa said through a rapid implementation of the National Development Strategy 1 (NDS1) and buoyant agriculture and mining sectors, the country remains positive about the prospects of notable economic growth in 2021. “To date, our flourishing progress has seen stability of the foreign exchange rate and prices of goods and services. As responsible and patriotic people, I urge all of us, across all economic spectrums, to persistently play our part in maintaining this stability, for a better quality of life for all,” he said. The President said the preservation of democratic principles, constitutional values and the rule of law must be upheld by all citizens, with no exceptions. He urged the Zimbabwe Anti-Corruption Commission (Zacc) including other players in the criminal justice system to decisively and swiftly bring perpetrators of crime and corruption to book. “Let us love our country and do that which is right, and in our national interest. With our goal of growth and prosperity in focus, corruption, criminality and delinquency should be permanently expunged from our society in favour of peace, harmony and lawful conduct,” said President Mnangagwa. — @mashnets