The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
The Civil Protection Unit (CPU) has started delivering aid to the 130 families in Beitbridge whose houses were destroyed by heavy rains and severe storms recently. The CPU’s focal person from the District Development Co-ordinator’s (DDC) office, Mr Jahson Mugodzwa yesterday said they had so far distributed aid to 83 homes. He said the rains had not only affected houses, but left a trail of destruction on a number of essential infrastructure including major roads linking the town and the rural component of the district. Mr Mugodzwa said aid was trickling in from various players and that in some cases, families will be helped to rebuild their homes. “We have conducted assessments in the affected areas with the assistance of the Disaster Rapid Response teams which are chaired at ward level by the local councillors,” he said. “Out of the 130 families who are affected by this disaster, we have managed to mobilise aid for 83 of them with the assistance of other players. Efforts are underway to reach out to everyone who was affected.” The official said some of the people received non-food items including, mosquito nets, blankets, hygiene kits (for both men and women), soap, and jerry can. Mr Mugodzwa said others were given US$250 to buy material to rebuild their homes, while those in dire need were also assisted with food hampers. He said most of the affected houses were built from either mud and poles or mud and farm bricks. These, he said, were constructed during drought period in the last three years. “As we continue to mobilise help, we want to also urge members of the community to build houses or structures that are adaptive to climate change to avoid the recurrence of such disasters,” said Mr Mugodzwa. He also appealed to the local business community and the construction sector to assist the affected families to rebuild new standard homes. In some instances, he said, some people had moved into their relatives or neighbours’ homes in the interim. “This is putting a strain on the community and at the same time we have scaled up the drought relief programme so that we augment food and nutrition to those families who are food insecure,” said Mr Mugodzwa. He said the worst affected areas were in War 2 (Dite, Tshabili), Ward 4 (Tongwe, Matshiloni), Ward 5 (Tshigomele, Makvhane, Lutumba), Ward 6 (Malala), Ward 7 (Masera), Ward 8 (Shashe), Ward 10 (Zezani) and Ward 15 (Shabwe). Meanwhile, World Vision Zimbabwe’s area co-ordinator for Beitbridge, Mrs Pretty Dube said they had responded to the call by the CPU and that they will construct a two-roomed house for a family of 23 members in Malala, Ward 6. “We have delivered cement on site and they are currently moulding bricks. In addition, we have donated 38 by 30kg mealie-meal, 32 by 2 litres cooking oil, 32 by 2kg sugar beans, and 32 by 1kg bars of soap to the CPU,” said Mrs Dube. — @tupeyo