The Chronicle Showbiz Correspondent Aspiring rapper and songwriter, Yungy has bagged two collaborations with Zimdancehall chanters Bazooka and Pumacol which he says will get him known in the cut throat music industry. Born Gift Bhowa in Masvingo, the 25-year-old Yungy grew up in Bulawayo’s Makokoba suburb. He graduated at Midlands State University with an Honours Degree in Media and Society Studies. The up-and-coming artiste has recorded the track Hapana with Bazooka and Kundayi with Pumacol. Both songs are set to be released in March this year and videos are to follow. “Working with artistes of different genres is challenging because Bazooka and Pumacol do dancehall and I do hip hop. So, I just had to make sure that we really sit down and get to know each other. I was a little bit challenges because Bazooka and Pumacol are big artistes and they are recognized in Zimbabwe. I’m proud that we pulled it off and work and produce music,” said Yungy. He said he worked with DJ Laynash from and Alleviate from Harare on the songs. “The songs were produced by DJ Laynash of Impala records and Alleviate. I recorded a song with Laynash and he liked it and suggested that I should do something with Pumacol and Bazooka. I was excited at the prospect of working with the two, whose music I admire,” said Yungy. After connecting with the two, the artiste exchanged music with them and Zimdancehall chanters loved his sound and he travelled to Harare and recorded both songs this year. He said after the release of the songs next month, he will work on his album to be released this year. Yungy has been in the arts since the age of 12. “I grew up loving music and I was in the school choir at Lotshe Primary School. I began producing music at the age of 12, where I met Makokoba Township Records producer Kaizer More who recorded my first single track Baba naMai,” said Yungy. He said he was a finalist at Amakhosi Dreams to fame Competition in 2011. Yungy has released tracks like Yinkalakatha, Sodom Gomora and Hondo.