The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
PRESIDENT Mnangagwa yesterday said life can only return to normal when the majority of citizens are vaccinated against Covid-19. The Government has budgeted US$100 million for the procurement of 20 million Covid-19 vaccines to inoculate about 10 million people countrywide. Government has said frontline workers will be prioritised in the programme as the first batch of Covid-19 vaccines is expected on Monday. The pandemic has disrupted normal life as members of the public are now mandated to wear face masks before leaving their homes, practice social distancing and wash hands regularly to prevent the spread of Covid-19. Government imposed a national level four lockdown and a 6PM to 6AM curfew which has resulted in some businesses closing shops for more than a month. Posting on his Twitter account, President Mnangagwa said Government is now focused on vaccinating most of the country’s citizens for the country to return to normal life. “Life can only return to normality once the majority of Zimbabweans have been vaccinated. This is the ultimate goal. “Thank you to both China and Russia for their donation of Covid-19 vaccines to the people of Zimbabwe. Your generosity during this dark time will not be forgotten,” tweeted President Mnangagwa. Addressing a Press conference on the vaccination programme in Harare, Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa said Government will dispatch a plane to China by tomorrow to collect the 200 000 Sinopharm Covid-19 vaccine doses donated by the Chinese government. She said the country has also purchased 600 000 doses of the Chinese Sinopharm vaccine whose delivery will be made during the first week of March. “With regards to the procurement of the Covid-19 vaccines, we have placed an order and we would like to assure the nation that the Ministry of Health and Child Care is accelerating acquisitions of vaccines and the latest developments are as follows: The Government of the people’s Republic of China has donated 200 000 doses of the Sinopharm Covid-19 vaccine doses. This vaccine which has 76 to 86 percent efficacy has been endorsed by the World Health Organisation and is already being used in several countries for example Brazil, Indonesia, Pakistan, Morocco, Turkey among many other nations,” said Minister Mutsvanga. “This donation of 200 000 doses and initial 600 000 doses which the Zimbabwean Government has purchased are expected by 15th of February 2021 and the 1st week of March 2021 respectively. An aircraft would be dispatched to China not later than 13th of February 2021 to collect the vaccine doses.” She said the country was expecting more vaccines from Russia and India while the country is also expecting to receive vaccines from the African Union vaccination programme. “The Government of Zimbabwe has set aside US$100 million to procure around 20 million vaccines to immunise 60 percent of the population which will assist us attain head immunity. Through this initiative we will vaccinate 10 million Zimbabweans,” she said. Religious leaders have commended the Government’s planned Covid-19 vaccination programme. They have urged citizens to take the Covid-19 vaccine once it is availed as this is within public health interest. Church leaders have urged the public to disregard falsehoods and conspiracy theories regarding the vaccine saying some of the people commenting on it were ill-informed about the subject. — @nqotshili.