The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Court Reporter
CHIEF Justice Luke Malaba, in his capacity at the chairperson of the Judicial Service Commission (JSC) has expressed condolences to the family of High Court judge Justice Clement Phiri who succumbed to Covid-19 complications, Justice Phiri died on Sunday at his home in Marondera, days after he tested positive for Covid-19. In a statement, CJ Malaba described Justice Phiri as an astute but unassuming judge who will be fondly remembered for his immense contribution to the development of the country’s jurisprudence in the 34 years that he served in the country’s justice delivery system. “The Chief Justice of Zimbabwe and Chairperson of the Judicial Service Commission, Honourable Justice Luke Malaba, the Judicial Service Commissioners; the Judge President of the High Court, judges and magistrates; the Secretary of the Judicial Service Commission and all members of the judicial service would like to express deepest condolences to the Phiri family on the passing on of the Honourable Justice Clement Phiri in Marondera on Sunday, 31 January 2021,” read the statement. “Our thoughts and prayers are with his wife, Mrs Mpho Phiri, and his children Mario, Palesa, Felistas and Dimpho. May the Lord comfort them during this difficult time.” Born on June 24, 1960, Justice Phiri studied law at the University of Zimbabwe. After completing his legal studies, he briefly worked in the then Ministry of Local Government, Rural and Urban Development, before going into private practice as a legal practitioner in 1986. In 2004 he became an advocate, a position he held until he was appointed a judge of the High Court of Zimbabwe on September 16, 2015 along with four other judges Justices Jester Helena Charewa, Tawanda Chitapi, Davison Moses Foroma, Nyaradzo Priscilla Munangati-Manongwa and Edith Kuda Mushore. He was among the group of 46 candidates who participated in the first ever public interviews for judges in Zimbabwe under the 2013 Constitution. Mourners are gathered at Number 36 Roosevelt Crescent, Winston Park in Marondera. Funeral arrangements will be announced in due course.