The Chronicle Formula 1 world champion Lewis Hamilton has signed a new one-year contract with Mercedes for the 2021 season.
The 36-year-old’s previous deal lapsed in 2020 but he will now race for Mercedes for a ninth season. Hamilton became the sport’s most successful driver ever in 2020, breaking Michael Schumacher’s all-time win record and drawing level with the German’s seven titles. “Our team has achieved incredible things together,” said Hamilton. “We look forward to building on our success even further, while continuously looking to improve, both on and off the track.” Part of the new deal involves a commitment from Mercedes to continue to work with Hamilton on seeking “greater diversity and inclusion in motorsport”. They will work on creating a new joint charitable foundation and Hamilton says the manufacturer has been “extremely supportive” on the issue. “I’m proud to say we are taking that effort further this year by launching a foundation dedicated to diversity and inclusion in the sport,” he added. “I am inspired by all that we can build together and can’t wait to get back on the track in March.” Team boss Toto Wolff said the duration of the contract was a consequence of the lateness of the talks, which was caused by them having to delay negotiations when Hamilton contracted Covid in December, and their mutual desire to “see how the world develops”. There is the uncertainty caused by the pandemic, as well as by a number of major rule changes in F1, including a budget cap that starts this year at $145m (£114m) and new technical rules for 2022 aimed at closing up the field. Wolff said the global situation could have an impact on the team’s revenue, while Daimler as a group is having to invest in electrification, adding: “We are living a financial reality that is very different from a few years ago.” He added: “We are totally in line — Lewis and me and the wider group in Mercedes — about the situation, so there was never a discrepancy in opinion. “It was just we felt that we had a good signature on a 2021 contract and we needed to get going and then find some time in 2021 earlier than this time to discuss the future.” — BBC Sport