The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter THE Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education has produced a school development committees (SDCs) handbook which is set to regulate parents in the running of learning institutions in the country. SDCs are part of schools’ governance structure and comprise parents and school heads for the development of schools. The handbook is meant to enhance cooperation between local communities and their schools. Primary and Secondary Education Minister Cain Mathema said it was important for the education sector to embrace the SDC handbook as it can lead to the development of schools while addressing any problems that can arise within learning institutions “This handbook is welcome as it will enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of SDCs. The handbook also comes in handy to the SDCs as it tackles issues to do with resource mobilisation, inclusivity, school health policy, disaster risk management and the need for learner-teacher friendly school environments. I therefore commend this handbook to all SDCs as they execute their duties and responsibilities. Furthermore, this handbook will go a long way in facilitating the full implementation of the Competence Based Curriculum (CBC),” said Minister Mathema. Commenting on the launched handbook, Primary and Secondary Education Permanent Secretary Mrs Tumisang Thabela said the handbook explains how various social groups can enhance delivery of education. “This handbook clarifies the roles of office bearers in the SDCs with a view to improving school governance and minimising the potential for conflict. It is in this spirit that the Ministry produced this handbook for SDCs to enhance efficiency and effectiveness in school governance. The handbook provides guidelines on the duties and responsibilities of the SDCs. Schools charge tuition fees and levies and also get donations to ensure the provision of goods and services for the teaching-learning processes. However, it is when goods and services are not properly procured that conflict may arise,” said Mrs Thabela. “This handbook provides guidelines on standards and methods of acquiring goods and services in a transparent manner. Thus, the handbook becomes a handy tool with which members of the SDC, old and new, should be fully acquainted.” She said the handbook could also be used for conflict resolutions. -@nqotshili