The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
More than 60 health workers in Kwekwe have contracted Covid-19 as the country grapples to contain the pandemic. This was revealed by Health and Child Care Deputy Minister, Dr John Mangwiro while officially launching the Midlands vaccination programme in Kwekwe on Tuesday. Dr Mangwiro said of the 62 infected, 42 had recovered while 20 were still in self-isolation. He encouraged the health workers to take the vaccine saying it protects them against the dreaded pandemic.
Midlands Provincial Affairs Minister, Larry Mavima was the first to receive the jab followed by a number of health workers, journalists and members of the Civil Protection Unit. “The vaccination programme is targeting frontline workers and I encourage all of you to take the vaccine to protect yourselves. Frontliners are the main target for the first phase as they are the ones exposed to the virus,” said Dr Mangwiro. After touring a number of isolations centres in Kwekwe and Redcliff, Dr Mangwiro expressed dismay over non-availability of oxygen at most of the facilities. “I have noted with concern that most of these ICU units do not have oxygen for severe cases. The oxygen should be made available as soon as possible at all isolation centres,” he said. Dr Mangwiro however, said he was happy that it had taken a short period of time to complete the renovation of isolation centres. “I am told Kwekwe has been operating without an isolation centre and I am happy that you now have the facilities to admit Covid-19 patients. I decided to come myself to inspect them and most of them are satisfactory. If the oxygen gas is made available, they will be complete,” he said. Dr Mangwiro toured Bale medical facility in Redcliff which has a capacity to admit 35 patients as well as Torwood Hospital which can admit up to 65 patients. He also toured a ward at Kwekwe General Hospital which was recently renovated and reserved for Covid-19 cases.
Dr Mangwiro said the gas that Government intends to acquire from Redcliff-based company, Steelmakers, should benefit the locals first. “We are in the process of negotiating a deal with Steelmakers for the provision of medical gas and this should be able to benefit the locals first before it is taken to other parts of the country. I therefore will check with my staff after all the processes have been completed to ensure that the oxygen has been connected,” he said. Kwekwe has been operating without an isolation centre after the only centre then, Mbizo 16 Clinic was condemned. The district CPU then identified Bale Medical Centre and Torwood which were lying idle and renovated them to become isolation centres. Kwekwe City Council is also in the process of converting Garandichauya Beerhall into an infectious disease hospital.