The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
FOR over a decade, Cliff Jeans has been overlooked yet he is a whole package that the hip- hop industry should embrace. Born Clifford Sibanda, the artiste who is based in Bulawayo joined the rap industry in 2008 and made his professional recording in 2010. Although he has had a fair stint in the music industry, the artiste says he feels it is time his name gets more recognition and even appears on billboards as he is good. Reflecting on his career, he said: “In 2010, I managed to record under a crew called YBG. I then went on to produce my own beats in 2013 because I wanted to have full control of my career and creativity. “That same year, I left YBG and joined Volte Face Gang which was founded by Cal Vin. In 2014, we recorded an EP titled Applying Pressure that got me recognition from other people leading to the growth of my fan base.” Cliff Jeans said Volte Face Gang which had top acts — Cal Vin, Krazz Kat, Gimel, Nosh Nosh, Chets and Mzoe7 was a strong force in the music industry. So driven were the artistes that most such as Mzoe 7 and Cal Vin pushed solo careers and made it big. This is what Cliff Jeans is now trying to achieve and get awards along the way. “I’ve been rapping and establishing myself for over a decade. In 2015, I got out of my comfort zone and embarked on a solo venture where I recorded my first single titled Regular. I recorded the song with Cal Vin and it received airplay from different radio stations. “It was on high rotation on Power FM and still is being played on some radio stations,” he said. Heavily influenced by the likes of Jay Z, Snoop Dogg, Lil Wayne, Tupac, Michael Jackson and Cassper Nyovest, Cliff Jeans has put out two albums, Street Menace and Another Level. As a producer, Cliff Jeans has produced music for the likes of Breeze Storm (Botswana), Fab G Mshana Kagogo (Zim), Weslinator (Zim) and DJ Noshy (Canada) among others. Recently, he released a track titled Stori Yiso. — @mthabisi_mthire