The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Gwanda Correspondent GWANDA-based hip hop musicians Zibusiso Tshuma aka Zie the Artiste and Kudakashwe Kagudu aka Kuda Kay have landed on the national music scene after taking second position at the Chimurenga Music competition. The national competition that was introduced in November last year was run by ZBC and the Institute of African Knowledge where artistes were challenged to remix Chimurenga songs. Over 700 songs were submitted with Chenai and Nyarai Muchaendesa from Harare coming out tops with a rendition of Mbuya Madhuve’s Ndega Ndega. For winning, they who won a car, ZWL$162 000 (equivalent to US$2 000) and an album recording deal. On second place were Zie the Artiste and Kuda Kay who remixed Chitungwiza Mbira Unity’s Zimbabwe Yakauya Nehondo. They also won a car, ZWL$81 000 (equivalent to US$1 000). Their winning song is set to get a video produced and get a feature on the Chimurenga Music compilation. On third place was Chitungwiza’s Magnif the Rapper and Pristine who sang a rendition of Oliver Mtukudzi’s Zimbabwe. They won ZWL$40 500 (equivalent to US$500) plus a video production of their winning song. They will also be featured on the Chimurenga Music compilation. Announcing the winners on Sunday evening, ZBC public relations officer Rumbie Moyo said the competition was oversubscribed with artistes from all corners of the country submitting their renditions of Chimurenga songs. “The competition which was launched on the 2nd of November, 2020 was run under the ZBC national youth station Power FM Zimbabwe. Artistes aged between 16 and 40 were required to submit their original patriotic music or renditions of old Chimurenga songs. “The response was overwhelming with over 700 songs having been submitted,” said Moyo.  She said thorough adjudication took place before the public was given a chance to vote for their favourites. “Adjudication began on the 2nd of December and ended on the 4th of December, 2020. The submitted songs were evaluated and the top 25 songs were selected. The 25 then underwent voting process which was done by the listeners to come up with the top three.” Commenting on their victory, Zie the Artiste and Kuda Kay said hard work and teamwork was their secret to success. Zie The Artist, 22, who is a musician, painter, producer and songwriter said they remixed Chitungwiza Mbira Unit’s Zimbabwe Yakauya Nehondo by giving it a hip hop feel. “We entered this competition to remind youths about the liberation struggle. I came up with the beat and did a verse while Kuda Kay did a verse and mastered the song. Due to the lockdown, we had to record the song at my house and I’m glad everything went well,” said Zie the Artist. Added Kuda Kay: “From the onset, I felt we performed well as the whole point of the competition was to remix or remake old Chimurenga songs into modern genres. “We did exactly that where Zimbabwe Yakauya Nehondo turned into a hip hop song. We added more lyrics and made it sound like the fighters at that time were speaking to this generation through our song,” said the 21-year-old music producer and aspiring audio engineer. – @mthabisi_mthire