The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
THERE is a new kid on the block that players in the arts industry should look out for if his 2021 goals that are filled with extra hard work and growth in the cutthroat sector are anything to go by. Born Naison Ndlovu, Neezy II, an 18-year-old motivated and energetic musician who is also an aspiring actor, choreographer and songwriter says he is out to conquer the arts industry. “I was born and bred in Bulawayo where I attended Milton High School. Now, I’m studying film and television production at CCA-Africa. “Since I was young, I loved music and started to pursue my professional music career in 2017 when I released my debut song titled Move Like This which featured SYL. Later on, I was groomed by my uncle, Mandlenkosi Daka aka Trent,” he said. Neezy II seems to be on the right track with his career as he has interacted with most influential musicians in Bulawayo, among them, Mzoe 7, Tebza, South Africa-based La Dee and Mzistozz. Last year, the artiste was signed under Muzibits Entertainment before he shifted to Trent’s management. Inspired by the sounds of Davido, Mr Eazi, Patoranking, Yemi Alade, Eazzy, Don Jazzy, Joeboy and Rema among others, the youngster said he is itching for success and growth. “2021 is a year I want to show people that I mean business. I’m working on an album called Priceless that’ll consist of 12 songs and looking at releasing an EP around April which will consist of five songs. Recently, I released a single called Everything which I collaborated on with Trigga Trent. The song has a Naija music feel. “I’m also working on a music video for my other single called Hold You Down and if all goes well, I’ll shoot it after the lockdown. The visuals will be shot by Layne Shoots from Indie Artsy,” said Neezy II as he shared some of his plans for the year.
He added that he is working on a song with Troy Larmain as well as another with Helen. However, the youngster bemoaned lack of support for untapped talent which he said should be given platforms to be heard on. – @mthabisi_mthire