The Chronicle THE National Matabeleland Zambezi Water Project (NMZWP) seemed to be a pipe-dream only because there was no high-level commitment to see it through. Yes, at about US$600 million it is extremely expensive; yes, it is long term and complex with its three broad phases in three different geographical locations which made it look daunting and impossible. It was mooted in 1912 and work on its first phase only started in 2004 when the first brick was laid at Gwayi-Shangani Dam in Hwange District. Be that as it may, not many were convinced that the reservoir would actually be built to completion. Even if it was, few ever thought that progress would move to the second phase. However, with the Second Republic in charge, what was once a pipe-dream, a long one indeed dating back to 1912, is more and more becoming a reality. The Government is investing more money into the building of the dam and were it not for the disruption caused by the Covid-19 pandemic, work would have been finished by the end of this year. Now, the end of the construction of the dam, which is the first phase of the huge project, is expected by the end of next year. With that in mind, the Government is moving to the second phase of the project — building a pipeline to link Gwayi-Shangani Dam with Bulawayo. A few days ago, the Government floated a tender for survey works for the 260km water pipeline route from the dam to the city. President Mnangagwa will on Thursday officiate at the groundbreaking ceremony of the Gwayi-Shangani pipeline, an event at which he will also commission the Epping Forest boreholes in Nyamandlovu. The Epping Forest project is one of the few short-term endeavours by the Government to assist Bulawayo navigate through its water shortage but the NMZWP is the permanent one. Matabeleland recognises all these steps as genuine work on the ground, not matters to be mentioned only as elections approach and forgotten as soon as elections are held and won. Also, President Mnangagwa and his Government are showing commitment to address many of the issues that the people of the region have always wanted addressed. Examples are many but top among them is the Gukurahundi issue which hadn’t been tackled openly and effectively since the end of the civil disturbances in 1987 when the Unity Accord was signed. The region is on the threshold of an economic boom once the NMZWP is done. Bulawayo would be more water-secure after years of perennial shortages. Residents would be relieved while businesses, some of which have relocated, or were considering, to other towns and cities that are blessed with adequate water supplies, would be encouraged to stay on. Communities that live along the pipeline from Gwayi-Shangani to Bulawayo would also have access to the water not only for drinking but also to undertake agriculture projects. Matabeleland North Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Richard Moyo, speaking to us yesterday, said the NMZWP is a game changer. “We are very excited about the ongoing developments in our region, which will have a positive impact on the growth of our economy,” he said. “The President will officiate at the groundbreaking ceremony for the Gwayi-Shangani pipeline, which is a reflection of his commitment to finalising outstanding projects. “The pipeline will transform the entire area along its route into a greenbelt with several irrigation schemes being set up between Bulawayo and the dam as communities staying along the pipeline will have access to water for irrigation. This is a very significant project in the sense that it will alleviate poverty and starvation among rural communities and permanently address the perennial water challenges in Bulawayo.” “There will be a lot of employment, especially for youths as it is Government policy that whenever there is a project in a particular area, locals should benefit in terms of employment opportunities. To us this project is certainly a game changer as our communities will tremendously benefit.” Government deserves plaudits for working so hard on the NMZWP. We expect the same commitment, backed by action, to continue so that what looked like an illusion for so long becomes reality in our lifetime.