The Chronicle Business Reporter THE Southern African Development Community (Sadc) and its European Union (EU) counterpart have affirmed commitment to continued mutual cooperation with the view to enhancing and making more impactful relations. Sadc executive secretary, Dr Stergomena Lawrence Tax, said the region cherishes the long-standing cordial relations and strong cooperation with the EU delegation in the Republic of Botswana, the headquarters of the regional bloc. Speaking during a virtual meeting with Mr Stefano Gatto, the senior inspector at the EU External Action Service this week, Dr Tax said the Sadc and EU cooperation was premised on the region’s strategic priorities in a number of areas of mutual interest. In an update issued Thursday by the bloc, she underscored the need for aligning national priorities and plans to agreed regional priorities. While the region continues to cooperate with the EU and highly appreciates the cooperation and support rendered to the region, Dr Tax said, it will be prudent to re-orient and enhance the existing cooperation by focusing more on impactful partnership and timely delivery of programmes. She cited the Tripartite Transport and Transit Facilitation Programme (TTTFP), and Support to Peace and Security in the Sadc Region (SPSS) programmes as one of the notable achievements that have contributed to Sadc integration agenda. Dr Tax said the TTTFP, for instance, has contributed to the development and harmonisation of transport and transit policies aimed at promoting trade facilitation in the Sadc, EAC, and Comesa Tripartite area. These were developed through the support from the EU and adopted to ensure continuous movement of essential goods and services during Covid-19 pandemic. Regarding the SPSS programme, Dr Tax said the intervention has positively impacted the regional integration agenda through interventions aimed at sustaining peace, security and regional stability. These include support for the deployment of election observation missions that have contributed to the consolidation and strengthening of democratic principles, as well as the development of regional guidelines and training for conflict resolution experts and mediators. Dr Tax further highlighted that support towards financial inclusion and trade enhancement initiatives was contributing positively to regional integration. Mr Gatto paid tribute to Dr Tax commended the mutual relations between the EU delegation and its partners. He emphasised that the EU delegation in Botswana was characterised by a strong Sadc component. The meeting was meant to exchange ideas on the existing cooperation between Sadc and the EU and how the existing cooperation can be enhanced.