The Chronicle Joel Tsvakwi, Showbiz Correspondent
Multi-award-winning author, Nathaniel Ziphoezinhle Mpofu who is a library assistant at the Bulawayo Public Library says the slowly dying reading culture has to be revived so that people do not consume fake information. “The reading culture needs to be revived because we’re now living in an information age. It is a fact that without reading, society can get lost. People are becoming victims of fake information as a result of the Covid-19-induced lockdown. Schools, through relevant authorities, have to find strategies to revive the reading culture. This should not be difficult because we now have technologically advanced gadgets which can complement the available traditional books,” Mpofu said. At the library Mpofu is always surrounded by writers and books; stories and atoms of diction and this has largely shaped his childhood desire of becoming a fine author who can be compared with the likes of the legendary Dambudzo Marechera. In 2015, Mpofu published his first novel for young adults titled The Parallel World. The novel became the inspiration for his RoilBAA Outstanding fiction award-winning novel, Inkless Quills which was published later in 2018. In between these opuses, Mpofu published five books — another novel for young adults in 2015, The Unreader; two short story anthologies in 2016, Maktub, I. the first edition, and Maktub, I. the second edition. In 2017, he then published a memoir, No 44 Andrea Drive and a poetry anthology, Poetic Potions. The Colour of Alchemy is another poetry anthology he published in 2019 and 2020 saw the publication of yet another RoilBAA Outstanding fiction award nominated novel, Nerfetiri. Motivational speaker and author Marshal Chiza who is Mpofu’s friend, said it is a pity that some of the city’s authors remain unrecognised. “Our beloved country is one of the countries with very high literacy levels on the continent, something which should resonate well with our authors. Why aren’t we recognising and supporting our own authors? There’s need for a massive shift of mindset in the field of publishing,” said Chiza. — @joelTsvakwi