The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Chronicle Correspondent
THE Zimbabwe Indigenous Languages Promotion Association (Zilpa) has called on Government to allocate funds to indigenous language groups to facilitate their appreciation by communities countrywide. In a statement during the commemoration of International Mother Language Day on Sunday, the indigenous languages body chairperson Mrs Maretha Dube said Government has a mandate to promote growth of formerly marginalised languages as per the Constitution that recognises 16 languages in the country. The International Mother Language Day is a worldwide annual observance held on 21 February to promote awareness of linguistic and cultural diversity and to promote multilingualism. Zilpa which is an umbrella body for the formerly marginalised indigenous languages of Zimbabwe, that include, Tonga, Kalanga, Venda, Sotho, Shangani and Nambya has its main thrust in promoting the development of indigenous languages and cultures. Since its inception, in pursuit of a space and voice for indigenous languages in the national discourse, the organisation has carried out various programmes and projects in education, media and culture, hence its involvement in literature development in indigenous languages to ensure that communities are also kept abreast about issues concerning their languages. “While we appreciate Government efforts to promote the development of these languages through educational institutions such as teachers’ colleges and universities, we feel that a lot can still be done. “Among other efforts, Government must ensure that there is budget allocation for the development of these languages as stated in the Constitution that the State must promote and advance the use of all languages used in Zimbabwe, including sign language, and must create conditions for the development of these languages,” said Mrs Dube. Mrs Dube said lack of financial support has crippled efforts of academically embracing promotion of marginalised languages. “Language associations have tried to produce teaching and learning material and they continue to produce literature but they face challenges in publishing their manuscripts because of lack of financial support. Also, the lack of clear language policy in education should be addressed. This is seen with the teacher deployment patterns that do not promote the teaching and learning of indigenous languages,” she said. Mrs Dube said the commemorations are vital as they give a clear review analysis of language promotion. “Mother Tongue Day is a very important day to all members of Zilpa as it helps individual members to reflect on our individual and collective commitment to their development, preservation and promotion. Language is an identity marker, a tool for communication and carrier of culture. We come to know who we are through the language that we speak, the way we do our things (culture),” said Mrs Dube. Zilpa has in the past successfully lobbied Government to introduce the teaching and learning of the formerly marginalise languages at teachers’ colleges, universities and primary schools. It also lobbied the constitution making process to officialise the 16 languages by including them in the constitution. — @mthabisi_mthire