The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
SILOBELA’S Ward 24 Councilor, Ephias Shoko has raised a red flag over the sprouting of shebeens and illegal tuck-shops that operate round the clock disregarding Covid-19 regulations. The situation has been made worse by the incessant rains that have left most rivers flooded making it difficult for law enforcement agencies to navigate the area. In an interview, Cllr Shoko said some village heads were now illegally allocating tuck-shop stands to individuals, which is supposed to be a prerogative of Zibagwe Rural District Council. The same village heads, who go on to pocket the money received, also go on to protect the tuck-shop owners and encourage them to operate whenever they want. “We are facing serious challenges in Langton Farm which is under my ward in Silobela. The tuck-shops operate non-stop and there is no social distancing being observed. People drink beer and, in most cases, they will be sharing the beer heightening the risk of spreading the disease. Despite disregarding the Covid-19 regulations, they are also disregarding lockdown regulations as announced by the Government,” said Cllr Shoko. He said the shebeens have also become a haven for thieves and a hideout for criminals. “Most people who would have come from other places and are on wanted lists, come to the area to hide. Thieves are also menacing and we are having torrid times in the area, the thieves target mostly livestock among other things. If they run out of money for beer, they steal pigs and sell them to raise money for beer,” he said. He said law enforcement agencies were not easily accessing the place due to flooded rivers. “Police from Cross Roads in Silobela or Msilahobe base cannot come to the place due to the flooded Vungu River. The river has been flooded for the past two weeks due to rains. On the other hand, police details from Nkayi cannot also access the area as they have to deal with the Shangani River which also has been full to capacity for almost the same period,” he said. He pleaded with relevant authorities to set up a police base in the area for easy enforcement of lockdown and Covid-19 regulations. “I have approached relevant authorities within the police force and asked them to facilitate that we get a police base in the area. I have tried to intervene but it seems the businesspeople have the backing of some traditional leaders who would have allocated them the stands and pocketed the money,” said Cllr Shoko.