The Chronicle CLEAN City Africa has stepped up efforts to reduce the impact of Covid-19 by disinfecting close to 5 000 buildings in 16 towns across the country over the past few months. The Cassava Smartech Zimbabwe’s on-demand waste management unit, now housed under Vaya Technologies Limited, offers specialist cleaning and decontamination services to disinfect physical sites to prevent the risk of coronavirus infection. Clean City’s highly trained teams, using specialist equipment, have the capacity to rapidly and professionally decontaminate sites and locations, such as public workplaces, offices, schools, universities, clinics, care homes and shops, among many others. “As Zimbabwe, along with the rest of the world, battles coronavirus, extra precaution has to be taken to keep the workplace sanitised and free from potentially harmful infections,” said Mr Givemore Jojo, Cassava Smartech’s chief commercial officer. He added that offices can be particularly susceptible to the spread of infectious diseases due to the number of people that occupy or frequent any office space. “That, combined with the relatively close proximity of the employees at the office, can lead to the transmission of infectious diseases very easily. An infected individual can quickly infect a vast area of office space within a few hours of entering it. The infected person may have touched different surfaces in the office, such as doors and door handle, desks, handrails, and other office facilities,” he said. Zimbabwe has recorded over 35 900 cases of Covid-19 and over 1 440 deaths by Wednesday this week, with the Government urging people to stay at home and protect themselves against the raging pandemic. Urging those that do not need to be at the office to stay at home, Mr Jojo, said his group was well aware of the need for workers serving in critical and essential services to go to work every day. “It’s important for citizens to stay at home and minimise the spread of this disease. But we are particularly keen to sanitise the premises of those serving in essential services. “We would like to regularly disinfect and decontaminate their premises, offices and their workplaces so they have the assurance that they are working in safe environments,” Mr Jojo said. He said preventing essential staff from contracting the infectious disease was critical in ensuring the country wins the battle against Covid-19. Clean City offers two specialised services to stop the spread of the coronavirus. The first service, a biohazard prevention service, involves professional team members carrying out a thorough sanitisation of buildings, focusing on touch-point surfaces to minimise any potential spread of the coronavirus throughout the building. The second and comprehensive biohazard clean-up and decontamination service is usually required when organizations have a confirmed case of a staff member infected with the virus, or when a member of staff has come into contact with an infected person. “In the latter, Clean City’s highly trained team will competently move in quickly, to sanitise and deep-clean the premises, to protect employees from the risk of further spreading the infection. Extra precaution is also applied to ensure that every square inch of workspace is decontaminated. Cassava Smartech, through its various subsidiaries, such as EcoCash and Steward Bank, and its sister company Econet Wireless Zimbabwe, has been at the forefront of assisting its customers and the public at large in mitigating the spread of Covid-19 through the use of digital, selfcare platforms. Clean City disinfection services are available through the Vaya App, accessible for free on the Apple App Store and the Google Play Store.