The Chronicle Chronicle Reporter When church doors closed, browser windows opened… From humble beginnings, the church has always found ways and means to communicate the gospel of God. From Moses writing the 10 commandments on tablets of stone, to saints writing scriptures on paper, today the modern-day man of God has adapted to the next level of spreading the word through social media. We have seen social media platforms such as Twitter, Facebook and Instagram, among many others being used to make viral videos, but now man and women of God have found the platforms to be easier modes to reach out to the world. In that light local and prominent self-proclaimed man of God, Mduduzi Dube, warmly known as Black Elisha has been working on reaching out to Christians, since the world went under lockdown. “The underlying power of social media is not the technology or platforms but the power comes from people connecting with each other. Ever since the world became different due to the Coronavirus pandemic, social media became the best mode of communication. The church has an unimaginable opportunity in social media to extend the borders of God’s Kingdom online,” said Black Elisha. He said not every church or people would seize the opportunity but, would eventually do so. “Some churches will choose to stick to their conventional methods. It will however, deal a great blow but none-the-less they will adapt. I envision that great things will happen through the grace of the Lord,” said Black Elisha. He said it was his vision to weave social media into the church’s cultural fabric. “Whether it is volunteering on the church’s digital team or real time we will make it a priority to have sermons on social media,” he said. “One cannot control the online conversation surrounding the church but it can be influenced. For the church to thrive it requires a new way of thinking,” noted Black Elisha. He noted that he would soon merge his social media pages so that he is able to spread the gospel across all platforms. Black Elisha has become one of the most popular prophets in Bulawayo, if not the country, through his popular spiritual padlock, which he says prevents spouses from cheating. 