The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
A LEADING promoter, UK-based Y2K Entertainment Promotions has urged local artistes to embrace and utilise online platforms in order for them to be viable beyond borders. The company which was formed in 2000 by Zimbabweans Fredrick Matenga and Alex Marapara focuses on promoting art from the Southern Africa region. This is the company that has been behind the hosting of Sama Festivals in the UK. These events have been held with the objective of showcasing African artistes in the UK. Artistes who had the opportunity to perform at these festivals include Jay Prayzah, Tocky Vibes, Baba Harare, Winky D, Mafikizolo and Ras Pompy among many others. In a presentation during an online engagement that was facilitated by Gwanda’s Talent Innovation Mentorship Exercise (Time) project last week, Matenga who has seen it all in the arts industry, said artistes need to develop strategies to compete internationally. “As Y2K Entertainment Promotions, our goal is to promote all types of art but we want hardworking, artistes.
Quizzed on how artistes can penetrate the international scene, Matenga said they need to join the digital world. “It is important for artistes to be popular locally before going international. The digital world has made it easy for artistes to market themselves internationally,” said Matenga. He said his company was using online platforms to identify talent that needs to be promoted and then contact the respective artistes. “I therefore urge artistes to put as much content as they can online and ensure its quality content which is key in their journey to being recognised internationally. Visibility online is very vital. Artistes shouldn’t just rely on local radio stations as most foreign-based people cannot access those stations, said Matenga. He said his company is open to doing business with all artistes that want to be recognised internationally. Matenga singled out the likes of the late music legend Oliver “Tuku” Mtukudzi and Thomas Mapfumo among artistes that his company has worked with. He said they had also worked with up-and-coming artistes, mostly from the Zimdancehall genre. “Our promotion cuts across Zimbabwe, Zambia, Malawi and South Africa among other African countries. We’ve had artistes like Ras Pompy whom we hosted (in the UK) when he was around 12 or 13 years. We ended up paying for his education, but unfortunately as he grew older, he lost the mojo for music,” Matenga said. The promoter went on to detail how collaborations could also assist in growing artistes’ brands and visibility. He singled Bulawayo’s Zimdancehall artiste, Ma9nine who recently collaborated with Enzo Ishall among artistes benefiting from collaborations. “I know collaborations with big artistes need money but the benefits are great,” said Matenga. He said artistes should realise that they are in business and as such whatever they do should be guided by business principles. “It’s key for artistes to take their art as a business and if need be, have a business plan. For example, Jah Prayzah invested in Keen Mushapaidze (manager), a graduate and look where his brand is now. That’s the importance of taking your art as a business,” said Matenga. Last week’s session was Time project’s first this year. During the sessions which were introduced last year, artistes from Matabeleland South attend skills training and capacity building workshops as part of efforts to develop them. — @mthabisi_mthire