The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
ECOLOGISTS and tourism operators in and around Hwange district have expressed concern over widespread vandalism of solar-powered water pumping equipment in wildlife sanctuaries. Hundreds of solar panels, batteries and other equipment such as water pumps running into several thousands of dollars was reportedly stolen by thieves suspected to be part of syndicates comprising locals and foreigners from neighbouring Botswana and Zambia. Affected areas are greater Hwange National Park including Sinamatela and Robins Camp on the edge of the park, Chamabondo and Zambezi National Park in Victoria Falls as well as Matetsi Unit 6 and 7 in Kazungula area. Schools, clinics and boreholes in communities around Hwange district have also been affected after solar panels donated by various organisations were vandalised especially during the lockdown which started in March last year. In Matetsi area alone, more than 120 solar panels were stolen in the last 17 months while in Hwange National Park a number have been stolen as well. While there is water for animals following the incessant rains being received in most parts of the country since the onset of the rain season, thousands of wild animals may be affected during the dry season if the vandalised infrastructure is not repaired. Tourism operators and wildlife organisations have for years been involved in wildlife and environment conservation and community development which include putting up infrastructure to supply water to animals and communities. Some of the organisations are Bhejane Trust, Victoria Falls Wildlife Trust, Wild is Life, Friends of Wilderness and others. In an interview Mr Trever Lane from Bhejane Trust bemoaned vandalism of water infrastructure in wildlife sanctuaries. “The situation is really bad because a lot of panels have been stolen. The problem is everywhere in Matetsi, Sinamatela, Robins area, Zambezi National Park and Hwange Main Camp. In the areas that we operate in 46 solar units were vandalised. This will drastically reduce water availability to wildlife if the panels are not replaced. Wild animals will go without water thereby affecting tourism and conservation,” he said. Mr Lane called for concerted efforts by operators and security in Zimbabwe, Zambia and Botswana. Chairperson for the Association for Tourism Hwange (ATH), Mrs Elisabeth Pasalk-Valerio who is the proprietor of Gwango Elephant Lodge and Heritage Resort said as conservationists and operators they remain committed to protecting wildlife despite the criminal elements. As tourism operators we remain highly committed to keeping the park safe. Police could not readily comment on the matter as Matabeleland North spokesperson Inspector Glory Banda was not reachable on his mobile phone. However, Chronicle gathered that no arrests have been made so far although the police have reacted to most of the reported incidents.