The Chronicle ZIMBABWE is recording a decline in new Covid-19 infections and deaths and this has been attributed to the national response to the pandemic which among other measures included re-introducing strict lockdown regulations last month to counter the second wave of the pandemic. Government in response to an upsurge in Covid-19 new infections and deaths, moved the country back to level 4 National lockdown last month. The level 4 National lockdown which was supposed to end on January 30, was extended by another two weeks and is expected to end on Monday. The national Covid-19 co-ordinator in the Office of the President and Cabinet, Dr Agnes Mahomva said the country’s Covid-19 epidemic curve was on a downward trend indicating that the country’s response is effective. She said what is critical is for citizens to appreciate that strictly adhering to Covid-19 preventions measures is meant to benefit them. Dr Mahomva said it is important for Zimbabweans to realise that wearing masks correctly, sanitising, maintaining social distancing and staying at home is not meant to please the police or Government but is for their protection. She said the most effective measure in fighting the pandemic is to prevent infection but in the event of individuals being infected, all measures should be taken to curb the spread of the virus. The decline in both new infections and deaths is very encouraging but what needs to be emphasised is that the pandemic is still with us hence the need to continue taking prevention measures. Some health experts are already calling on the Government to relax some of the lockdown regulations in response to the positive developments and this is very logical as long as it does not compromise the people’s safety. The economy should be opened up to sustain livelihoods but as already stated, this should not be at the expense of the people’s lives. Those whose economic sectors are opened up have to strictly adhere to the prevention measures so that while the nation benefits from the economic activities, citizens are not exposed to the pandemic. Covid-19 super spreader activities such as church gatherings, weddings, parties and other such gatherings should remain banned until such a time the pandemic is contained. There is an urgent need to review business operating hours to allow them to close at 6PM instead of 3PM so that people have more shopping hours. The overcrowding being witnessed especially in retail outlets is as a result of limited shopping hours. It is difficult at the moment to maintain social distancing in retail outlets because of the overcrowding. The informal sector can be opened up under very stringent regulations compelling operators to strictly adhere to the health protocols meant to curb the spread of the pandemic. The new normal is that whatever we do, we must ensure it does not expose us to this deadly pandemic which continues to claim lives globally. We do not have a cure for the pandemic and as already stated by Dr Mahomva, our most effective weapon against this monster is prevention.