The Chronicle Joel Tsvakwi, Showbiz Correspondent
BINGA-based independent film producer, Joseph Munsaka popularly known as U-Jay, is on the verge of creating history after partnering with leading Nigerian film producer, Collins Ogbanno Too. Collins Ogbanno Too owns a film production House called Nsukka Chronicles in Enugu State, Nigeria and the two are working on producing an action-packed movie this year. The movie will be titled, The Black Box with its storyline centred on corruption, love, and deception. Munsaka who is the director of Santa Joy Services film production House which is in Binga and his Nigerian counterpart are at an advanced stage of their collaboration. According to Munsaka, this is the fruition of an idea which was mooted last year but was disrupted by the outbreak of Covid-19. “I’m really excited about this development especially as a person coming from this part of the country which somehow is marginalised in terms of access to the rest of the world. This is a positive step as it shows that here in Binga we have what it takes to make it in the film industry,” Munsaka said. He said once lockdown measures are eased, the film will be shot in Zimbabwe and Nigeria. “Some scenes will be shot in Lagos and Insuki states in Nigeria and 65 percent of the scenes will be shot in Zimbabwe (Binga, Victoria Falls and Hwange). All pre-production logistics have been completed and the script that was jointly written by Collins Ogbanno Too and myself is ready.” Munsaka went on to share their filming strategy. “The Zimbabwean scenes will be directed by myself while Nigerian scenes will be directed by Collins. This will involve the Zimbabwean cast travelling to Nigeria and Nigerian actors travelling to Zimbabwe. “Two funders (one local and one foreigner) have made a commitment to financially support the production,” he added. Munsaka said the movie will require a lot of resources hence the importance to engage others. “This is a moderately high budget movie and plans are at an advanced stage to romp in local producers like Kalulu Mumpande of Zambezi Valley Films and Elias Sibanda of Elino Studios, all independent film production houses from Binga,” said Munsaka. — @joelTsvakwi