The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
The tables are turning for fast-rising musician Mzoe 7 who had to endure seven years of disappointment, missing out on different awards, as he has bagged two awards in a space of three months. Last week, Mzoe 7 won a Zimbabwe Music Award (Zima) in the Best Kwaito/House/Dance category. He beat the likes of DJ Naida, John Cole, Tebza and Novuyo Seagirl. This was his third nomination at the Zimas after his 2016 nomination in the Best Alternative category and 2017 when he was nominated for Best Single. The Zima win followed a Roil Bulawayo Arts Award in the Best Video category which he bagged last year for the hit single, Asambeni. Born in Entumbane high density suburb in Bulawayo, Mzoe 7 (real name Mzobanzi Mlauzi) said he was grateful for the awards as they show that all his hard work over the years is finally being rewarded. “It’s overwhelming (Zima win) and it actually caught me unaware. I’ve been honestly putting in the work, from branding, stage work and the creative side. This victory isn’t mine alone as I’m grateful to everyone who’s been part of the movement as they’re making this young boy’s dream come true,” said Mzoe 7. The artiste who does not want to be confined to a particular genre said he had lost hope after submitting his works to various award shows for seven years and losing them all. “I was a bit hurt then I reminded myself of what inspired me to do music in the first place. That’s when I appreciated that we may not be winners every time, but the most important thing was to be the best in what I did and offer people the best entertainment. I think this is also why I’ve one of the best stage presences as I always want to make sure I compensate every loss.” Mzoe 7 who featured on Sandra Ndebele’s popular Ingoma song paid tribute to his mother, Maggie Msebele-Mlauzi who he said has been his pillar of strength. “My mother never gave up on me and she taught me to be persistent and never to give up. Consistency has helped me a lot as I’ve never stopped working, whether I put out a good or average record. I’m one person who’s kept on going even when other people would discourage my hustle,” said an emotional Mzoe 7. Looking into 2021, the musician said he is planning to drop his debut album titled United Country Africa. Next month, a single titled The Pandemic (Mjolo) will be released. Mzoe 7 rose to fame in 2014 when he released the Afro beat dance song, Kwasa Kwasa that blazed many dance floors in Bulawayo and Harare. In the same year, as part of the crew House Rebels with DJ Skaiva, they released the track Godobori. In 2016 and 2017, Mzoe 7 started reinventing himself and was nominated at the Zimas and in 2017, he collaborated with Ndebele on the song Ingoma. In 2018, he released Gqom track, Ulimenemene that got a lot of airplay and was popular at events he performed at. In 2019, he dropped the song Elliot (Resurrection song) after the Pastor Lukau incident. Last year Mzoe 7 released the Amapiano track Asambeni that got him the two awards.