The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent Africa’s premier documentary festival, Encounters South African International Documentary Festival has called on producers of feature, mid-length and short documentary film to submit entries for the 2021 edition of the festival. The festival that is run from Cape Town is in its 23rd edition. It gives an opportunity for film makers around the globe to mingle and be known. This is an opportunity that the film sector in Zimbabwe should not let pass by as it will surely open doors for their growth. Posting on their Facebook account recently, the festival organisers said the event will be held this year in June. “Following on the success of the Virtually Everywhere Festival in 2020, Encounters will be returning with an excellent programme of quality documentaries from South Africa, the broader African region and the rest of the world. “The 10-day Virtual Encounters 2021 Festival (10-20 June) promises some of the globe’s most talked-about and award-winning documentaries, a diverse and riveting line-up, available online, and a few Covid-19-safe live events across South Africa,” said the festival organisers. The deadline for submissions is March 31, 2021 and works in progress or rough cuts that will be ready in time for the festival that runs from June 10 to 20 will be accepted. “Encounters Talks will be conducted where panel discussions, master classes, Q&As and industry sessions will be offered through high quality discussions presented in partnership with industry organisations, funders, international partners, academic institutions and civil society. The impactful programme, free and online, will cover a spectrum of topics, including opportunities during uncertain times, navigating cultural issues, regional collaborations, emerging technologies, conversations about the craft with experts, and many more,” read part of the statement. Organisers said South African or African film submissions are exempt from paying a submission fee while international entries will be expected to pay a nominal submission fee of US$15. – @mthabisi_mthire