The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
PRESIDENT Mnangagwa has announced that the programme of rolling out Covid-19 vaccines scientifically ascertained to be safe, will be State funded with all citizens set to access the doses for free with national vaccine deployment framework having since been finalised. Government targets to initially inoculate at least 60 percent of the population to achieve population immunity. The first phase of inoculation of the vaccine is primarily targeting front line workers, the elderly and those with underlying medical conditions. There were conflicting media reports quoting Finance and Economic Development Minister, Professor Mthuli Ncube as having said that some citizens will have to pay for the Covid-19 vaccine with Government only catering for frontline workers and the most vulnerable members of society. Addressing the nation yesterday, President Mnangagwa set the record straight, saying all citizens wishing to be vaccinated, will access the doses for free. “Our overall National Response Strategy has reached a stage where we can now introduce vaccines as a second front preventive measure. As such, Covid-19 vaccines, which have been scientifically ascertained to be safe, will soon be introduced. These will be State funded and free,” he said. “The national vaccine deployment framework has also been finalised. The initial objective is to inoculate at least 60 percent of the population to achieve population immunity. The first phase of inoculation of the vaccine will see our hard-working front-line workers, the elderly and those with underlying medical conditions being prioritised.” The President also commended Chinese President Xi Jimping and his government for donating 200 000 doses of the Sinopharm vaccine. Zimbabwe was listed as one of the first countries set to receive Covid-19 vaccines from China. According to the Chinese Embassy, what is now left is for Zimbabwe to collect the Covid-19 vaccine as the Asian economic powerhouse moves to ensure that the drug is accessible globally to all nations.