The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
The month of love under lockdown will see musicians, Samuzik, Berita Khumalo and PJ Flames all releasing music that speaks to the soul on or before Valentine’s Day. Samuzik (real name Sam Siwela) will release the video for his hit song Ngisemathandweni while PJ Flames is set to unveil his first solo project, Ndiwe on Valentine’s Day. Berita on the other hand will release a video for the song Ndikhawulele on Thursday. The South Africa-based artiste who is nominated at the Zimbabwe Music Awards in the Best RnB/Soul Album and Album of the Year categories will be celebrating one year since her album, Songs in the Key of Love was released with the release of this video. “To celebrate the one-year anniversary of Berita’s album Songs in the Key of Love, she’ll be releasing the official music video for the opening track Ndikhawulele just in time for Valentine’s Day 2021,” said Berita’s management. She is also expected to share behind-the-scenes footage of Songs in the Key of Love album next week to keep people entertained. Samuzik who is part of the successful Ngoma Ingoma Outfit said he was now ready to release the video that had been shelved for more than five months. “Ladies and gentlemen, in the season of love and as a Valentine’s gift to all the lovers in the world, I’m happy to present to you, the official video for Ngisemathandweni. This song is part of a project called The Songbook of love and it will première on YouTube and my Facebook page on the 14th of February 2021 at 6pm,” said Samuzik. Ngisemathandweni has been given heavy rotation on local radio stations where it topped local charts since its release last year. As for UK-based PJ Flames who was the lead singer of the Flame Band, the release of Ndiwe on Valentine’s Day will introduce him to fans as a solo artiste. “On the 14th of February, I’ll be releasing my debut single as a solo artiste. This isn’t my fist track, but it’s the first that I’m sharing with people,” said the artiste.