The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Established artistes may want to up their game as more and more pupils are venturing into music with the latest being Ropafadzo Madungwe, a Form 4 student at Pumula High School in Bulawayo. Affectionately referred to as Ropa, the 16-year-old has taken the indefinite closure of schools as an opportunity to expose her talent for the whole world to admire. The up-and-coming musician who is composing her own songs made her debut appearance in the studio last year and was able to drop her first single early this year. On Valentine’s Day she went a step further and launched her EP titled Favour through a WhatsApp online bidding platform. The first CD was bought for RTGS$6 000. Ropa through her manager Kirah who is a seasoned gospel artiste said she is now working on getting her music known. Narrating how Ropa’s music journey began, Kirah said: “Ropa was born in a family of four and she started singing at the age of eight. At the age of 12, she began ministering at churches and events. To show how passionate she was, she would record herself singing and since then, her love for music continued to grow,” said Kirah. He said Ropa who is the lead vocalist for AFM Destiny Centre Assembly’s (Phelandaba West branch) praise and worship team was fortunate because her parents supported her passion for singing. “Her parents have been very supportive. They’re the ones who kept on encouraging her to never to give up. A church member of theirs actually introduced them to me and they asked me to assist her. I’m glad I managed to nurture and encourage her to record as she had almost given up after the initial project didn’t come out well. “In December last year, she recorded a single titled Corona that was meant to educate people about the deadly Covid-19 pandemic. The song was released in January this year and has since been sent to various radio stations countrywide,” he said. Taking advantage of the closure of schools, Kirah said the passionate gospel singer went on to record a three-track EP titled Favour. He featured on two of the songs. “The EP has three songs, title track Favour, Mune simba and Nyasha. Favour is a song that talks about God’s favour to those who earnestly seek him. For those who love dancing, the song will keep you on your toes. “Mune simba talks of God’s greatness and power if one adheres to His statutes. Nyasha is a song of worship and on this song, Ropa asks God to pour unending grace for His grace never fails,” said Kirah. The EP was recorded at Velocity Records with her music being marketed and distributed by Kirah Musix Inc. –
@mthabisi_mthire