The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter BULAWAYO Basketball Association (BBA) secretary-general Francis Dube is disappointed by the province’s failure to provide a single player in the Basketball Union of Zimbabwe (BUZ) men’s top 15 shortlist for the team of the decade accolade. BUZ will honour the best players of the past decade in three categories; team of the decade, player of the decade and people’s choice player of the decade. Last week BUZ unveiled the 15 men and 15 women shortlists selected by a special panel comprising various coaches from around the country. Despite failing to provide a player in the men’s shortlist, six players were voted into the women’s list. “As Bulawayo basketball, we are pleased that we had eight players who played in Bulawayo during the 10-year period making it into the top 15. Some are still active here in Bulawayo, while others moved to Harare and some are playing in Zambia and  South Africa. So we feel Bulawayo has made a great impact in the women’s game. We have always had a team in the finals of the BUZ championships, with Mavericks winning it in 2016,” said Dube. “We are, however, disappointed in not having a single player in the top 15 men’s list yet we are the second biggest playing province in the country. But we feel due process was done and the best players in the country were selected. As Bulawayo, we have done well in the ladies division. “Last year, two women from Bulawayo played in the Afro Basket tournament,” he said. Team of the decade shortlists Men’s list Nathan Warikandwa, lnnocent Sithole, Tatenda Mature, Duncan Shenje, Tawanda Chitsinde, Warren Tegama, Trevor Sanyatwe, Everisto Pasipamire, Eric Banda, Tatenda Tswatswa, Taurai Chitsinde, Vitalis Chikoko, Simbarashe Mungomezi, Neville Chivhanganye, Walter Mabhena Women’s list Geraldine Chiponda, Serena Chareka, Dorcas Marondera, Fadzai Mabasa, Charity Mucucuti, Yolanda Matayataya, Rachael Makoni, Sibongile Mkandla, Juliet Misihairambwi, Sithabile Ngandini, Alexandra Maseko, Patience Chinhoyi, Melisa Majonga, Sharon Chamwarura, Margaret Magwaro. – @innocentskizoe