The Chronicle The moment all Zimbabweans have been waiting for is nigh. Getting a Covid-19 vaccine jab is becoming a reality with each passing day. Just yesterday, Government revealed that the country’s development partners had pledged $234 million towards the country’s Covid-19 response. In a joint statement, Finance and Economic Development Minister Professor Mthuli Ncube and Health and Child Care acting Minister Professor Amon Murwira said the funds were disbursed through the United Nations agencies to support the country’s Covid-19 fight. “Government acknowledges and appreciates the support from development partners towards the Covid-19 response in cash (although not directly but through mostly UN agencies) and in kind. The support has been targeted towards the eight pillars of the Response Plan as follows; Coordination, planning and monitoring; Risk communication and community engagement; Surveillance, rapid response teams and case investigation; Points of entry; National laboratories; Infection prevention and control; Case management; and Procurement, operational support and logistics,” read the joint statement. To add to what development partners have already donated, Zimbabwe is set to be one of the first countries to benefit from the Covid-19 vaccines which the Chinese government will soon roll out to 14 developing countries in the fight against the deadly global pandemic. The news came as the country reported 17 more Covid-19 related deaths and 160 new cases in 24 hours, bringing the total number of cases to 33 548. As at February 1, 2021, Zimbabwe has reported 1 234 Covid-19 related deaths, while the seven-day rolling average for new cases fell to 272 from 295 on Sunday. We commend Government in doing a sterling job in the fight against the global pandemic and development partners for standing with Zimbabweans in this hour of need. However, we continue to preach the gospel of compliance to Covid-19-induced regulations. By avoiding new infections, we all lessen the burden on Government and development partners who also have to fight the Covid-19 pandemic in their countries. Wearing a face mask, standing a few metres away from others, avoiding gatherings, travelling only when necessary, sanitising and simple handwashing can go a long way in saving lives. The health sector can also be saved from collapse. While Government and donors will continue to play their part, we all can help defeat this pandemic once and for all. It is without doubt that Covid-19 will eventually be defeated, but our actions will determine when it will be defeated and how much damage the virus will have been done. We cannot afford to relax simply because a vaccine is on the way. This is the time to be even more vigilant as the last kicks of a dying horse are the most dangerous. Let’s not forget about the new variants of the ever-mutating virus which can easily make available vaccines useless. Above all, let’s not forget that no vaccine can bring back all the loved ones we have lost to Covid-19. No vaccine can bring back the time that has been lost forever to painful but necessary lockdowns. No vaccine can bring back all the losses made by companies and individuals alike. What we lose to this virus, we lose for good.