The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
PRIMARY and Secondary Education Minister Cain Mathema has appointed a 14-member Zimbabwe School Examinations Council board to run the country’s public examination until 2024. Bindura University of Science Education Vice Chancellor Professor Eddie Mwenje who was the past Zimsec board chairman retained his post. He is deputised by a lawyer Mrs Milidzani Faith Masiye-Moyo. Board members include Chinhoyi University of Technology Vice-Chancellor Professor David Jambwa Simbi, Educationist and Administrator Mr John Dewah, Retired National University of Science and Technology Registrar Mr Fidelis Mhlanga, educationist and educational measurement specialist Dr Lazarus Nembaware, University of Zimbabwe lecturer Dr Eventhough Ndlovu, private school head Ms Suzzane Joscelyne and educationist and administrator Mr Rogers Sisimayi. Other board members are lawyer Mrs Wadzanayi Chirongoma, Zimbabwe Teachers’ Association president Mr Richard Gundane, educationist (specialist in Learners with Disabilities) Mr Sindile Mhlanga, accountant Mr Kind Kapfudza and another accountant Mr Mike Kangeremu. Minister Mathema announced the new board yesterday during a press briefing at Mhlahlandlela Government Complex in Bulawayo. He said the 14 board members were appointed following consultations with President Mnangagwa.
He said he is set to appoint two additional board members to make them 16. “After consultations with HE the President of the Republic of Zimbabwe, Cde ED Mnangagwa, I am proud to announce the appointment of 14 new board members to the Zimsec Board, who will serve in this capacity from 2021 to 2024. Zimsec is a parastatal under the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education formed by an Act of Parliament in 1996, mandated to administer public examinations at Grade Seven, Ordinary Level, and Advanced Level. It is an internationally accredited examinations Board which has very strong links with other examination Boards through the: Southern Africa Association of Educational Assessment; Association of Educational Assessment in Africa; and International Association of Educational Assessment,” he said. Minister Mathema said the board will assume their new roles at a time when Government has started examining most learners under the competence-based education curriculum “This new board comes in at a time when Zimsec is examining the Ministry’s competence-based curriculum. The Board of Directors which superintends over Zimsec is made up of academics, lawyers, educationists, accountants and renowned administrators in whom we have faith that standards will be maintained and made better through their guidance,” said Minister Mathema.