The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
CHIEF Vezi Maduna Mafu has been described as a hero who never compromised on matters of principle and his contributions were felt both at the village and national level. The chief was buried yesterday at his homestead in Avoca, Filabusi in line with Nguni customs where only the immediate family is allowed at the gravesite. He died last Saturday after battling diabetes. Mourners described Chief Maduna as a candid and tolerant man who wanted to see a united nation.  His works towards liberating the country and promoting development in post independent Zimbabwe saw Government according him a State-assisted burial. This saw Government taking care of burial arrangements while a national flag was handed over to his widow Mrs Lizzie Mafu (nee Mpala). Speaking during the burial service, Local Government and Public Works Minister July Moyo said while some traditional leaders stood with the oppressive colonial regime, Chief Maduna stood with the people leading to his arrest and detention. “I want to tell the people gathered here that this is a total chief, a total leader and a total hero. He could perform so many functions from the village to national level,” said Minister Moyo.  “The death of our esteemed Chief is a hammer blow to the country and the traditional leadership institution as he was the longest serving chief having been appointed a substantive chief on 27 August 1974. The traditional leadership is poorer without him.” He said Chief Maduna’s political activism started in 1960 when he joined the National Democratic Party leading to his arrest in 1961 for participating in politics. “In 1971 he was arrested again and accused of having held a meeting with Vote Moyo and Norman Mabhena and was detained at Gwanda Prison. In 1976 as a chief he rejected the colonial rule settlement and he was arrested with Msenki A Moyo, a veteran politician. “They were detained at Gwanda Prison and later transferred to Collen Bawn Prison. He was further detained at Hwahwa Prison Camp 4 under the indefinite detention and no family member was allowed to visit him. He was detained together with Elliot Maphenduka, Welshman Mabhena, Makhathini Guduza, Walter Mlambo, Thengani Guduza, Million Sibanda, Mloyiswa Vigwa Moyo and Esau Moyo,” he said. “Chief Maduna was also detained at Shabhani, Khami and Ross Camp prisons. He was detained until 1980 when the country got independence. Chief Maduna was indeed an illustrious son of the soil who did not regard his esteemed position as a chief as an opportunity to curry favours for the oppressors but sacrificed himself together with his peers for the liberation of the country. He will be sadly missed but his fighting spirit will live on.” Minister Moyo said after Independence, the chief spearheaded developmental projects in Matabeleland South.
He said the of Godlwayo Cultural Centre, Avoca Health Centre, Avoca Secondary School and the construction of Maduna Dam were brainchilds of Chief Maduna . Minister Moyo said the chief’s development programmes led to the establishment of Siwaze Irrigation System and was a proponent of the dualisation of West Nicholson to Mberengwa road. Speaking during the burial service, President of the Chiefs Council Chief Fortune Charumbira said Chief Maduna was an exemplary leader who gave direction on matters to do with the traditional leadership institution. “If you want to describe Chief Maduna accurately first of all he was a culturalist and a traditionalist. He really defended the values of ubuntu, our culture and identity. He was not shy about it. He used to hold cultural festivals at his homestead and we have also attended some of them here in Avoca. “In terms of personality, he was a serious man. He knew the cause of Africa and Zimbabwe, where we came from. He was one of the pillars of colonial resistance. He was detained because he wanted to defend the African values and he defended our own inheritance as Zimbabweans,” said Chief Charumbira.  He described him as an astute and fearless chief who spoke truth to power. “He was open and would tell you the truth. He is not one who would tell leaders what they want to hear. He would tell the leaders what they should know and even correct so that they can lead effectively. So, we feel the loss for such a great chief because from what I have said you can see he was a double icon. A liberator, detained for fighting colonial regime and an icon even after independence in fighting for our cultural values and ubuntu. We have lost a great man and a hero to our institution,” he said. Chief Maduna’s son Mr Dambisamahubo Mafu who is set to assume the chieftaincy said the family had lost a great mentor in Chief Maduna. He said his father was tolerant to divergent political parties as he wanted the country to be united. “What I can say about my father is that he was sober minded. He believed in what we call truism. He believed that when he speaks the truth, the truth cannot be defeated. So his philosophy was driven by the truth so when his compatriots (other chiefs) chose to wine and dine with the colonialists he chose to fight for his country,” he said. “My father was brave. He spoke his mind that is why he was an advisor to the current President (Mnangagwa) and former President (Mugabe). He would rebuke, advise, criticise, exhort. He praises you when he sees that you have done good and criticises you when done wrong and rebukes you when he sees that you need to be rebuked.” One of the chiefs from Insiza district, Chief Sibasa said he learnt a lot from Chief Maduna since 2008 when he was sworn in. He said he would visit Chief Maduna to seek counsel especially on difficult issues regarding the chieftaincy. “He encouraged me to be firm especially when engaging with other men. He said no one should be a push-over especially on matters of principle. So, his death is a great loss for us who worked under his wing,” said Chief Sibasa. Chief Maduna was a member of the Land Tenure Commission which toured countries such as Holland, Denmark, Botswana and Kenya and he also became a Senator for Matabeleland South between 1985 and 2000. He did his primary education at Vumangwe and Mthangaleni Primary Schools before proceeding to Hwahwa Secondary School for his secondary education. He obtained an accounting Diploma at Usher Institute and later studied at Moeng College in Botswana.
He is survived by wife Lizzie, 12 children and 27 grandchildren. — @nqotshili