The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter The International Olympic Committee (IOC) executive board has proposed a new strategic roadmap called the Agenda 2020+5 that will guide the work of the IOC and the Olympic movement until 2025 The roadmap will be presented to members at the 137th IOC session next month for further discussion and adoption. The roadmap includes 15 new recommendations to be implemented over the course of five years to guide the IOC through effects of the coronavirus pandemic, including the postponed Tokyo 2020 Games. IOC president Thomas Bach said: “When we adopted Olympic Agenda 2020 in 2014, we did so under the adage of ‘change or be changed’. This still holds true today. The world around us has continued to evolve. Nothing illustrates this better than the ongoing global Covid-19 pandemic and its consequences for society. “As challenging as the circumstances may appear right now, if we draw the right conclusions, we can turn these into opportunities. To do so, we must address this future environment without delay. We need to carry forward Olympic Agenda 2020. This is why we have developed Olympic Agenda 2020+5 and its recommendations with the IOC executive board and based on the feedback we received from stakeholders following the Olympism and Corona messages.” The 15 recommendations are: – Strengthen the uniqueness and the universality of the Olympic Games – Foster sustainable Olympic Games – Reinforce athletes’ rights and responsibilities – Continue to attract best athletes – Further strengthen safe sport and the protection of clean athletes – Enhance and promote the Road to the Olympic Games – Coordinate the harmonisation of the sports calendar – Grow digital engagement with people – Encourage the development of virtual sports and further engage with video gaming communities – Strengthen the role of sport as an important enabler for the UN Sustainable Development Goals – Strengthen the support to refugees and populations affected by displacement – Reach out beyond the Olympic community – Continue to lead by example in corporate citizenship – Strengthen the Olympic Movement through good governance – Innovate revenue generation models – @ZililoR