The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
Away from Clement Magwaza’s fast-paced rhumba music shows, Naspampanana, the only female dancer in the Macrey Super Sounds, is a mother and vendor. She was born Thobekile Nxumalo 32 years ago but that name has almost faded away like a once popular song. On stage, she goes beat for beat, toe to toe, song for song with her male counterparts of Magwaza’s band. Her exploits on stage were seen last year during the Credisi finale that was held virtually. Her name, Naspampanana given to the dancer by Magwaza, symbolises a small and tight dynamite which enthrals fans with unmatched dancing skills. “I was given the stage name by Magwaza and it has stuck with me such that many have forgotten my real name. Actually, in the band, we call each other by our stage names such that you might work with someone for many years and never know their real names,” Naspampanana said. A mother of three, Naspampanana like many women breaking new ground said she had to overcome many ‘tunes’ to build her name on dance floors. “When I started dancing (in 2012), they used to say yibuzanka (craziness), but they have changed that stance after discovering that I’m earning a living from it like any other employed person. My mother is late so my father is the one who had challenges with it,” she said. Naspampanana who hails from Makhana Village under Chief Madliwa in Nkayi District did her education at Sembewula Primary and Mateme Secondary schools. However, she only went as far as Form Three. Her firstborn is in Form Two, second born – Grade Seven while the youngest is in Grade Four. The nimble-footed dancer said she never had a dream to be part of the glitz and glamour and the ups and downs of rhumba music as she came from a conservative family which never allowed children to attend music shows. “Truly speaking, I didn’t know how to dance because growing up, you’d receive a beating for attending a music show or be seen dancing. Our parents wouldn’t allow us to dance because they were church people,” she said. But then how did she venture into showbiz? “I was pushed onto the dance floor by the economic challenges at the time so that I could try and earn a living,” she said. “I was staying in Munyoro area of Nkulumane and Ndux Junior happened to stay there around 2012. He used to hold practice sessions and people would attend so I also went there out of curiosity. He had girls that were dancing so I thought of giving it a try and I managed to learn the ropes,” she said. Naspampanana said she spent about a year with Ndux Junior before she left for Inyathi where she briefly worked as a shop cashier before joining Magwaza and his Macrey Super Sounds. “Magwaza had a show in Cowdray Park so it happened that one of the dancers I was with while with Ndux Jr, Japan had joined Magwaza. We interacted leading to Magwaza also joining the conversation. He then invited me to the stage and the rest is history,” she said. While there were three other ladies dancing with Magwaza at the time, she said they left the band leaving her as the only female dancer. Being the only female dancer in a band with 13 males, Naspampanana said does not bother her. “There’s order and rules in the band that’s why I’m still with the band after nine years. The boys treat me like their sister and they’re overprotective of me. I interact with them how any woman working in a male-dominated office would. You’ll not even realise that I’m a woman when we’re at work,” she said. Naspampanana said the boys provide security for her from those who may want to cross boundaries, adding that they even accompany her to the toilet when they are performing at shows just to ensure she is safe always. Reflecting on her journey with the group, she said one of her most memorable shows was in Botswana where she left fans spellbound with her dancing skills. “We were at Tutume in Botswana and the people went crazy and started throwing a lot of money on stage as I was dancing. The money was more than a thousand pula if I remember well and I used it to buy clothes and groceries,” she said. On stage, the slim dancer is quite a crowd puller as she does her work with a smile. Clad in a short skirt, skin tight, black and white socks and matching takkies, the dancer will be in full gear for the dance floor. Doing the Tshibilika (faster version of Borrowdale) or ukuKokotsha (Macrey Sounds’ signature dance) she even does a split, similar to that of Sandra Ndebele, to a thunderous applause from her fans. Following years in the music industry, the dancer said she wishes to be recognised for her efforts. “My wish is to also get recognised like other dancers that have won awards. It’s every dancer’s dream to be rewarded for their efforts. I hope those who select (nominees) will one day consider my skills,” she said. Outside rhumba music, Naspampanana said she is a great fan of Ndebele traditional food and Splash music. She said her employer, Magwaza, who does not drink or smoke, takes good care of the band members describing him as a disciplinarian who wants the best for his band members. “I’m very happy working for Magwaza. He pays us well and we have a salary for local shows and outside shows. He makes sure that we’re well catered for. If I don’t have food or money, his doors are always open,” she said. Magwaza concurred with his dancer saying she deserves recognition for her efforts on stage as she has made a huge contribution to the growth of the rhumba genre. “She is a committed, punctual and disciplined person who is loved by the fans. If it happens that we have a show and she’s not on stage, we’ll be in trouble with the fans. “It’s been nine years working with her and I’ve never had any complaints with her. Women are talented and committed. They just need to be supported. Naspampanana has broken a barrier and opened a way for more women to be loved and appreciated in Rhumba music,” he said. On the Naspampanana stage name he gave her, Magwaza said it was inspired by one of her performances. Turning to her family, the dancer said she lost contact with her children’s father after he relocated to Botswana when some Zimbabweans were allowed to join their relatives in the neighbouring country, leaving her to fend for her children alone. To ensure they are taken care of, she said besides music, she is a vendor in Cowdray Pak suburb and being a popular dancer that she is, entices a number of customers to her stand. “When things are normal, we go for music shows mostly on weekends and during the week, I’ll be vending in Cowdray Park where I stay. I sell tomatoes, potatoes, butternuts and other vegetables that I get from my sister’s plot. Most customers send their kids to buy at my place so I’m usually guaranteed of getting business,” she said. Due to the Covid-19 pandemic, Naspampanana said she has been left grounded as music shows are banned. — @themkhust