The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
IT may sound bizarre but that is what it is. Farai Chigumbu (16), a Chaplin High Form Four pupil last Saturday made his mark on the creative sector after he successfully hosted the inaugural Midlands Teen Arts Awards (MTAA). The awards which were held virtually in adherence to Covid-19 lockdown regulations were introduced to appreciate talent among youths in the arts industry. They were held under the theme “Culture cannot die” with several up-and-coming artistes being awarded. Those who dared to walk the journey Chigumbu did know that it takes a lot of hard work, sweat, dedication and lots of money to put together an awards ceremony. For a virtual event under lockdown, the organisation of the event and securing of prizes among many other things required funding, something that has made many pull out from organising such events. Fortunately for the teen, well-wishers came to his rescue as they backed him to ensure his dream came to life. Chronicle Showbiz caught up with the youngster to have an appreciation of his zeal for the arts. Chigumbu who is based in Gweru simply said he had a bias towards arts as he wanted to be an artiste from childhood. “As a child, I always wanted to be an artiste. I remember how I’d sing and imitate my favourite artistes and media personalities while looking at myself on the mirror. I’d also tell my mother that I was Rueben Barwe. “My mother saw how passionate I was and she introduced me to a children’s choir, Joyful Young Melodies when I was in Grade 4 so that they help nurture my talent. From there, I managed to do some solo projects and presented speeches,” he said. Chigumbu said his mother’s support did not end there as she went on to look for a secondary school that would further develop his arts skills. “When I wanted to enrol for Form 1, it was difficult for my mother to get a school for me, not because I failed, but because she was looking for a school which was offering theatre arts as a subject. That’s why I enrolled at Chaplin High. “When I was in Form 1, I managed to be part of the senior team for the theatre arts club and we went for district competitions. We won and managed to represent the Midlands province at the 2019 Nash drama competition,” he said. Putting what he has learnt from Chaplin to test, Chigumbu this year organised the Midlands Teen Arts Awards to encourage and promote his peers. For his contribution in the arts sector thus far, the youngster has been nominated for this year’s Empire 263 Music and Arts Awards in the Best Newcomer category. The teen who is also good at creating content and scriptwriting is working on a production titled Impilo which is a medical drama series. From what he is learning at Chaplin High, Chigumbu said he is ready to take on the world. All this he said is a result of the Chaplin High Theatre Club patron, Victor Nyamayedenga. “Everything that I’m doing, I took it from Mr Nyamayedenga, the Chaplin High Theatre Club patron. He’s the one teaching me everything and he’s also my role model. “My main goal is to help and motivate all other youths who we feel they cannot achieve their dreams,” he said. He went on to thank his parents for supporting him. “I’d like to thank God for giving me such supportive parents as they’ve been supporting me since day one, same applies with my siblings,” said the last born in a family of four. – @mthabisi_mthire