The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
WHILE their opponents in the penultimate Africa Cup of Nations (Afcon) qualifier Botswana are holding camp for their locally-based players, Zimbabwe are yet to announce their provisional squad for the tie. The Warriors are set to travel to Botswana for the encounter on March 22 before hosting Zambia in Harare eight days later. These two assignments are a must-win for the Warriors if they harbour hopes of joining Group H leaders and African champions Algeria in the finals set for Cameroon next year. Botswana, Zambia and Zimbabwe all have fair chances of qualifying, with the Warriors second on five points from four games, while the Zebras are third with four points and Chipolopolo anchor the group with three points. Victory for Zimbabwe in Botswana and defeat for Zambia in their clash against Algeria on the same day will see the Warriors qualifying with a game to spare. However, Zimbabwe’s hopes for flawless preparations seem to have been affected by the setback caused by some UK clubs’ stance to ignore a request for players. The Warriors’ technical staff postponed announcement of the provisional squad, as they contemplate making changes to the list they had drawn up. After more than two weeks of waiting for responses from UK clubs for the release of players for the two Afcon qualifiers, the Warriors’ technical team appear to be giving up the chase. Warriors general manager Wellington Mpandare said announcement of the squad has now been put on hold. “We’re contemplating making changes to the list of the provisional squad that had been drawn up. It’s been two weeks since we sent invitation letters and some clubs are yet to respond. We’ve been making follow-ups everyday and now it’s about time a decision is made. “We’re putting the announcement of the squad on hold, as we might be forced to announce the squad with those players from the UK, hoping that something happens by March 15 or completely leave them out. This doesn’t mean that engagement and negotiations are stopping; we’re just highlighting possible options,” said Mpandare. Due to recent measures it introduced to help prevent spread of the new Covid-19 variant, the United Kingdom placed Zimbabwe and Botswana among 17 African countries in its virus’ red zone. This means chances of having the UK-based Warriors’ contingent of midfielder Marvelous Nakamba, defenders Tendayi Darikwa, Zemura Jordan and Adam Chicksen as well as striker David Moyo flying in for the games against Botswana and Zambia are now slim. From the above players, Nakamba and Darikwa have been consistent performers in Warriors’ colours. The unavailability of the UK players opens avenues for some local players to be included for camp. – @ZililoR