The Chronicle Chronicle Reporter GOVERNMENT has moved to protect the country’s wetlands with some families set to be relocated to areas fit for human habitation. A mapping exercise aimed at addressing the problem is currently underway. In her post cabinet briefing yesterday, the Minister of Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Monica Mutsvangwa said Cabinet was informed that the process of producing a masterplan of all ecologically sensitive areas has started. She said technical teams comprising experts from the Zimbabwe Geospatial and Space Agency and the Environmental Management Agency in collaboration with the relevant Ministries are expected to take about two and half months to complete the mapping exercise. The Minister also said the delineation of the country’s wetlands has already started and a National Wetlands Policy has been prepared as part of the  strategy to protect the country’s multi-faceted habitats and ensure sustainable management of the natural environment and resources. “ Cabinet received a progress report on the identification and quantification of all irregular and dysfunctional settlements in local authorities and on wetlands which was presented by Honourable Vice President C.G.D.N Chiwenga as Chairman of the Enhanced Cabinet Committee on Emergency Preparedness and Disaster Management,” she said. “On the identification and quantification of households in irregular and dysfunctional settlements, including in flood-prone areas, Cabinet was informed that the verification process is underway and should be completed in the coming ten days. Care is being exercised to ensure that only deserving beneficiaries are registered for relocation.” The Minister said the first category of those to be relocated is of families currently illegally settled dangerously on land and these will be relocated as soon as the identified destinations have been prepared and equipped with services, in order to pave way for the demolition of their illegal structures. “The second category shall be for those families settled on land suitable for urban development but which requires regularisation and the provision of basic municipal services,” she added. Minister Mutsvangwa said devolution funds will be used for the housing construction programme and financial instruments which will encourage the private sector to participate in infrastructural development are being designed. She said existing urban regeneration programmes are being revived for building flats in places such as Mbare in Harare, Makokoba in Bulawayo, and Sakubva in Mutare and other cities. “In future, up to 40 percent of all housing settlements in urban areas will follow the high-rise model for densification which frees land for industries, schools, clinics, recreational centres and other social development aspects. In addition, Government is in the process of deploying to all provinces personnel with the requisite skills in physical planning, infrastructure development and environmental management,” said Minister Mutsvangwa.