The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent A TOTAL of US$45 million is required to rehabilitate the 312 kilometre road network, which is in a deplorable state in the City of Kwekwe. Upgrading of major roads only, which cover a stretch of 70 kilometres, would gobble up to US$10 million, the local authority said. Most roads in the mining town have outlived their lifespan and driving has become a nightmare to motorists who have to navigate through potholes. The heavy rains being received this season have worsened the situation. Acting Town Clerk, Dr Lucia Mnkandla, said the Kwekwe City Council has been carrying out some resealing work but due to incessant rains the works have been almost insignificant due to funding constraints. “We have been carrying out interventions including resealing, reconstruction, re-gravelling, pothole patching and installation or maintenance of the associated stormwater drainage. “But all the efforts have been thwarted by the torrential rains but we do not stop,” said Dr Mnkandla. The local authority last year introduced a two percent roads levy, which the local authority says have made a huge impact in the road rehabilitation. “The two percent contribution from rates has had a big impact to date as it was used in 2020 to patch all pothole in the CBD,” she said. In a recent interview city mayor, Councilor Angeline Kasipo, said the Zimbabwe National Road Administration (Zinara) allocation was insignificant. “Our roads are in a very bad state but also the fund we are getting from Zinara is a drop in the ocean. In 2020 alone we got an allocation of ZW$1 million and you will agree with me that it is very little,” she said. “However, this year I understand that the Government has plans to assist because most local authorities have the same problem.” Clr Kasipo said from the ZW$10 million devolution funds, half of it was also channeled towards roads rehabilitation but still it was not enough. The development comes at a time when Cabinet has declared roads across the country an emergency. Zinara on the other hand has also pledged to ensure that road authorities are well and timeously funded.