The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
POET and musician, Lady Tshawe says 2020 was a blessed year for her as she became a mother, describing this as a beautiful journey that has given her life a new meaning. Lady Tshawe (real name Nomashawekazi Damasane) who is married to Thembalethu Ndlovu, welcomed her son, Kai Mihlali Jongikhaya Vuyolwandile Ndlovu on August 3. Although 2020 was a bleak year for artistes including Lady Tshawe because of the Covid-19 pandemic, she said it was a year where she got the best gift. “2020 as we all know was a hectic year and it seems like 2021 is still giving us a run. However, 2020 came with amazing blessings for me of which I’m eternally grateful. God saw it fit that in 2020, I be called mother and it’s been such a beautiful journey. “I’m scared, but ever since I met my son, the world isn’t as bleak anymore. Motherhood has shown me sides of myself that I didn’t know existed. Life has a whole new meaning. “My art now has a whole different purpose to it now. In short, I love being a mom,” said Lady Tshawe. She said she did not have a difficult pregnancy as it was all smooth sailing, although under lockdown. Looking back at 2020, Lady Tshawe said her art thrived and she even tried out acting, although it was subdued by the pandemic. “In 2020, we did continue creating, it was hard but we did it. People should check out the poetry I did at the Bulawayo Arts Festival. I also decided to try out acting and collaborated with Mgcini Nyoni. We did a short film called Day 44, said Lady Tshawe. “Because I love creating, I jumped at the opportunity to be featured on Vusa Mkhaya’s track called Masiyephambili. This is one track that has not only put Bulawayo on the map, but it has exposed the talent we knew was in Bulawayo, to the world.” 2020 indeed was a good year for the artiste because a play that she wrote and directed in 2019 about mental health titled 6.55 won her a Roil Bulawayo Arts Award, something which she said, spurred her to work harder in the industry. “It was a play highlighting the need for us to take mental health seriously based loosely on the life of my late grandfather, Rev Mathias Damasane. “In 2020, it was nominated for best theatre production at the Bulawayo Arts Awards (BAA) and I’m proud to say that we brought home the gong. “This was a win that inspired me to work even harder to tell stories that will resonate with people. I live for telling stories, whether it’s through poetry, acting or even music. Give me the platform and my voice will be heard,” said a bold Lady Tshawe. To add onto her 2020 accomplishments, Lady Tshawe’s clothing label, Ndebele Crush grew last year as it gained visibility with more and more people from the city donning it. For this year, she said she is working on new material.