The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Chaplin High School was the toast of the night on Saturday where they emerged the biggest winners at the inaugural Midlands Teen Arts Awards (MTAA). The awards that were held virtually saw the school bagging four awards. Chaplin High seems to have a top notch theatre arts club as the school was awarded the Best Theatre Arts club with their drama, Chibiri coming out tops in the Best theatrical production category. To top it off, their students, Runyararo Masviba and Cuthbert Chuchu were named best theatre actress and actor respectively. Running under the theme “Culture cannot die”, the awards were initiated to appreciate talent among youths in the arts industry. Producer and musician Johnson Brown was another hit as his song, Never Thought was adjudged the best song with his collaboration with Street and Jason also being given the nod for best collaboration. Bulawayo’s fast-rising star, Tebza was also honoured for having the Best teen video for President Yama2k. Sitcom, Indlalifa: The Heir was awarded as the best teen drama. People need to look out for Pazimuti, a series about unconditional love which was named as the most talked about series. For those who want to be updated on the happenings in the Midlands as well as the juicy gossip, Midlands Celebs is a site you may want to log onto as it was awarded as the best online media. Brainchild of the awards, 16-year-old Farai Chigumbu congratulated the winners and encouraged those who did not win not to lose hope and continue working hard. He said the winners will be given their gongs once lockdown measures are eased. Below is a list of MTAA 2021 winners: Music category
Best Female Artist: Leona lilie
Best Male Artist: Jason Rulex
Best song: Never thought (Johnson Brown)
Best collaboration: Johnson Brown ft street and Jason Film and Tv category
Best actress: Diana Mwanamombe
Best Actor: Simbarashe Gwavava
Coolest Teen Tv Series: The chat Midlands
Best Short film: Ghetto proposal Gone wrong
Best Comedian: Saga Vines Special Awards
Best music producer: Gwenyambira
Best film producer: Matsvimbo E
Best DJ: DJ Luvex
Best poet: Mazvita Theatre Awards
Best actress: Runyararo Masviba
Best Actor: Cuthbert Chuchu
Best Theatre Arts club: Chaplin High theatre arts club
Best Teen singer: Smash kid
Best creative Teen: Zim stars
Best Teen video: President Yama2k
Best Teen Drama: Indlalifa
Best Dance crew: Voltage dancers
Best theatrical production: Chibhiri Chaplin high Best online media
Midlands celebs
Most talked about Tv series: Pazimuti
Ultimate Icon Award: Nyasha David