The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
ZANU-PF proportional representation legislator for Beitbridge, Cde Lisa Singo (47), who passed away on Thursday and was declared a liberation heroine was buried at the Beitbridge District Heroes’ Acre yesterday. Mourners led by Matabeleland South Minister of State for Provincial Affairs, Cde Abedneco Ncube braved the heavy rains that started pounding the area as soon as the parliamentarian’s remains arrived at the gravesite. It only stopped raining at the end of proceedings. Speaking at the event, Beitbridge Senator Cde Tambudzani Mohadi said the rains were synonymous with the burial of royals, since Cde Singo was a princess. Cde Singo, who joined politics at a tender age as a member of the Zapu youth league before the merger with Zanu into Zanu-PF in 1987, was elected into the National Assembly through the quota system in 2018. Tragedy struck on Thursday morning when she collapsed at her home after complaining of high blood pressure and was rushed to a private clinic, where she passed on. Senator Mohadi said the legislator was diabetic. “Our hearts are still heavy, the death remains a shock to us, but we will carry on from where she left. She ran her race and did that very well,” she said. Cde Singo is survived by two children and one grandchild. Minister Ncube said the late parliamentarian was not a novice in politics and that Zimbabwe had lost an energetic, humble and sober politician. “She joined Zanu-PF soon after completing O-level studies and was registered under the Lufuno cell group. She was later elected into the Batanai branch where she grew politically and was elected to district level where she served as secretary for lands and resettlement for five years. At the time of her death, she was a Member of Parliament under the Proportional Representation (PR) and serving as the secretary for Labour and Production in the Beitbridge District Coordinating committee (DCC),” he said. Cde Ncube urged the mourners to emulate the life of the parliamentarian who lived a humble life and was dedicated to serve others. He said she would put the interests of others first and was always approachable. Zanu-PF Matabeleland South provincial chairman, Cde Rabelani Choeni, said the party had lost a hardworking young politician who had potential to rise in the national political field. Family spokesperson, Mr Joseph Singo said; “This is a sad loss to us as a family. We held her in high regard as someone who was very dependable and would always remain sober whenever issues arose. To us she had great potential as a young and energetic politician,” said Mr Singo. Beitbridge East legislator, Cde Albert Nguluvhe said, the community had lost a sister and mother figure who was passionate about the girl child, women and the youth’s rights. Among the mourners were chairperson of the Transport and Infrastructure parliamentary portfolio committee, Cde Oscar Gorerino (MP Shamva North), Uzumba MP Cde Tichaona Karumazondo, chairperson of the Parliamentary Portifolio committee on Higher and Tertiary Education Ms Lindiwe Maphosa, Gwanda senator Cde Alm Mkhwebu, Beitridge West legislator Cde Ruth Maboyi and senior civil servants.