The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
AT one time he was swallowing 32 pills a day, feeling weak and dizzy. So bad was the situation that he collapsed in his room and had to be rushed to hospital where he was put on oxygen. These are some of the things comedian, Q Dube (real name Nqobizitha Dube) went through when he fell victim to the second strain of Covid-19 that invaded his body and tried to take his life. The South Africa-based jester who shared pictures and videos of him when he was bedridden, was in his adopted country when he fell ill last month. Covid-19 has claimed many lives including Government ministers and company executives in Zimbabwe and South Africa. The new variant is more contagious and deadly as it spreads faster and could lead to more deaths. Q Dube returned to South Africa from Zimbabwe on January 11 and fell ill five days later. “I got ill when I returned from Zimbabwe. I started getting headaches and feeling dizzy but I thought it was the after effects of travelling. When after a few days I lost my sense of taste and smell, I immediately did tests and went into quarantine. “I figured the new strain had got to me and while in isolation the situation got worse on a Saturday,” recounted Q Dube who lives with relatives in the neighbouring country. He said on the day he coughed and immediately lost his breath and collapsed. “I woke up and the dizziness was worse. Around midday, I coughed once or twice and soon after, I couldn’t breathe. I then tried to walk to the window to get some air and as I stood up, I collapsed, I guess. “I don’t remember much from there. I apparently managed to text my aunt and told her I couldn’t breathe. That’s when she came and found me on the floor, according to her.” After being checked by the doctor, it was noted that the comedian was in a terrible state as he was slipping into pneumonia. “Things only started making sense hours after the doctor came. I was put on oxygen and drip as well. My BP was extremely low and temperature extremely high. The doctor told me I was going through a respiratory shock and slipping into pneumonia,” Q Dube said. He said the doctor did his best which helped him recover. “I was on oxygen and drip for two days and that during period I was given a ‘mountain’ of pills to take. At some point, I was taking 32 pills a day. I was so eager to get well that I just swallowed what I was told to without asking questions,” said Q Dube. He said despite all this medication, he could not get out of bed on his own. “It took a week to regain full mobility as I was extremely weak. Walking to the bathroom next door to me felt like being in an MMA fight. It’s only after a week that I started walking around my room more but I’d get tired quickly. “A few days later, my appetite started returning slowly which was a welcome development. Then as days went by, I started working again on my laptop while in bed just to keep my mind active. Sense of taste slowly returned,” said Q Dube. He said after nearly a month, he is now finally out of isolation. He is now back at work and is constantly doing exercises to keep his blood flowing. “I’ve since come out of isolation and I’m doing slight workouts just to keep the blood flowing. I’m finally going for the body I’ve always admired. “I’m also back at work and doing some nice things with MagambaTV on the Take Down as well as Makwerekwere News. I also have a podcast dropping next month.” However, due to his Covid-19 encounter, Q Dube said it will take some time for him to get back on stage as the sight of crowds still traumatises him. “I’ll take time to get back to doing stand-up comedy as that requires me to interact with crowds. In as much as there’s social distancing at shows I’m choosing to lay low for now. I think I’m still traumatised. “At least when doing podcasts and shooting, it’ll be in controlled settings,” said a concerned Q Dube. Looking back, he said he was finding it difficult establish how and where he got infected. “When I was in Bulawayo I wasn’t reckless. I didn’t go to clubs or any crowded places. Even the contact tracing, all the people tested negative. People should just be careful with this Covid thing. You never know when or where you will get it. Mask up and sanitise regularly,” he advised. But, not all has been in vain as the ordeal has taught Q Dube to chase his dreams and not hold back. “When I was weak and lying in bed, I resolved that where I was giving 100 percent, I should give 200 percent. I almost died with a notebook full of ideas and I’ll never forgive myself for that. So from now onwards, I want to accomplish everything that I ever wanted to,” said Q Dube.