The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
ZANU-PF has condemned the sprouting of illegal settlements in prohibited areas such as wetlands and lauded President Mnangagwa for setting up an all-stakeholders team led by Vice-President Constantino Chiwenga to address the menace. Lately, land barons have been illegally parcelling out residential and commercial stands, especially on wetlands with Government crafting tough legislation to decisively deal with the culprits. President Mnangagwa has since directed the Ministry of National Housing and Social Amenities as well as other relevant ministries, departments and agencies to immediately identify suitable areas for human habitation in the wake of chaotic and unplanned illegal settlements sprouting in rural and urban areas. In a statement, Zanu-PF national spokesperson Ambassador Simon Khaya Moyo said the party fully supports Government’s efforts in the fight against land barons. “The issue of land barons who have become a law unto themselves must be brought to an end. The culprits must indeed be promptly brought to book. The revolutionary party Zanu-PF fully supports Government efforts and firm action as pronounced by His Excellency the President Cde ED Mnangagwa on the issue of land barons and illegal settlements in urban councils notably Harare, Chitungwiza, Gweru, Mutare and other towns,” he said. “The sprouting of illegal settlements in wetland areas, river banks and other prohibited areas is both criminal and inhuman. Wetlands and river banks must be protected at all costs.” Ambassador Khaya Moyo said the destruction of wetlands worsens the impact of floods as and this is being experienced in many parts of the country. Deforestation and the destruction of wetlands in Zimbabwe has led to the damaging of homes, roads and crops in parts of the country. Ambassador Khaya Moyo commended police for recently arresting some of the alleged culprits, saying it has set the tone in efforts to bring normalcy into the critical real estate sector, which is a key cog to achieving the national target of an Upper Middle-Income Economy as espoused in Vision 2030. “The party also applauds the President for constituting an all-stakeholders teams led by Honourable Vice-President, General Retired Dr Constantino Chiwenga to address the menace. All structures of the party must co-operate with Honourable VP Chiwenga’s esteemed team to achieve the desired results,” he said. “Indeed, all patriotic Zimbabweans must act likewise. Together, we shall prevail over this challenge.”