The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
A SOMBRE atmosphere engulfed Mpofu village in Lupane on Saturday when a village head, who died from burns sustained when his grandson doused a three- roomed house with petrol before setting it alight, was buried. Robert Donga (75) died at Mpilo Central Hospital in Bulawayo on Wednesday night following the Tuesday fire which had left him with severe burns all over the body. His wife Angela Mpala (52) missed the burial as she is still admitted to St Luke’s Hospital in Lupane while a domestic worker Praymore Sibanda (19) is in a critical condition at Mpilo Central Hospital. Seven people were sleeping in the house on Tuesday when Kholwani Donga (26) allegedly doused it with petrol before setting it alight forcing the occupants to escape through the window. Ms Ayanda Donga (23), three nieces Bandile Donga (8), Buhle Hadebe (10) and Andile Hadebe (7) escaped with no injuries. Nothing was salvaged from the house. Local leadership in Lupane including Lupane East MP Cde Mbongeni Dube, Zanu-PF District Coordinating Committee chair Cde Permanent Sibanda and Lupane District Development Coordinator who chairs the local Civil Protection Unit Mrs Enerty Sithole among others, attended the burial. Mrs Sithole said the family desperately needs help. “As CPU we have written to the province for onward submission to our national office appealing for help on behalf of the family. So far we have managed to gather some cash, mealie meal and clothes and we are still appealing for help from stakeholders to help the family,” she said. Cde Sibanda called for a spirit of Ubuntu. “We would want to appeal to people to be able to settle differences without resorting to violence or engaging in witch-hunting. Let’s have the spirit of Ubuntu and desist from posting pictures that are insensitive to the bereaved on social media. The family needs counselling. Let’s also allow investigations to go on so that proper justice is served,” he said. Family spokesperson Mr Alexander Donga said the family is heartbroken. Meanwhile, Kholwani appeared in court on Friday charged with one count of murder and six counts of attempted murder. He was not asked to plead to the charges when he appeared before Lupane resident magistrate Mr Ndumo Masuku who remanded him in custody to April 1. The magistrate advised the accused to apply to the High Court for bail. Allegations are that the accused poured petrol on the house’s doors before setting it alight just after midnight on Tuesday. Ms Donga and the three girls were sleeping in a spare bedroom while Praymore was sleeping in the lounge where the fire started. Ms Donga jumped through the window when she woke up and discovered that the house was on fire. She then rescued the other occupants through the window. Her mother also escaped through the bedroom window before they both helped the now deceased old man through the same window. The deceased sustained burns all over the body and was rushed to hospital together with his wife and Praymore, who also sustained severe burns. — @ncubeleon