The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Gwanda Correspondent GWANDA Municipality is losing thousands of dollars every month after failing to collect revenue from truckers who have established their truck inns around the central business district. A designated truck inn was identified a few years back just outside the CBD near Joshua Mqabuko Nkomo Polytechnic although it was reported that the site is on  a wetland. Since then, truckers coming from either Beitbridge or Bulawayo have established their own truck inn stops. Some tend to park on lay byes, a few kilometres from the town while daring truckers have found home at the core of the gold rich Matabeleland South provincial capital. A number of truckers have been observed making night stops along Soudan Street commonly known as Main Street in front of Agribank open space, Oasis Furniture’s and Bulawayo-Gwanda rank. An open space in front of Swift has also been turned into an illegal truck inn. According to Beitbridge truck inns, truckers fork out around R50 to R80 for a 24-hour stay. This translates to thousands of dollars being lost in a month by Gwanda Municipality as there are failing to make the truckers fork out for the services in their jurisdiction. In an interview, Gwanda Mayor Councillor Njabulo Siziba confirmed that council was losing thousands for failing to collect revenue from the truckers. “From the research that l have made I can gather that the open space in front of Swift belongs to the Municipality. “Getting more details on the issue showed that there are no revenue incomes generated by council from truckers that park in that space,” said Clr Siziba. The mayor said he has since engaged the relevant department to ensure that council realises revenue which will be directed to service delivery. Truck drivers who spoke to Chronicle said they have a found place to harbour which is safe from criminals. Mr Donald Chirodzo plying the Pretoria-Lusaka cargo travel route said, “I have been travelling through Gwanda for the past two years and this is one of the safest free places to make a detour. “We don’t not mind to pay their dues but only if they make then services fit for a truck inn,” said Mr Chirodzo. A Gwanda resident who declined to be named said the council should be vigilant on identifying initiatives which can also play a part in resusciating the growth and development of its infrastructure. – @mthabisi_mthire