The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
GOVERNMENT has called on businesses and residents to pay their bills on time to ensure sustainability of service delivery. Most councils are struggling to render quality service to residents as they are owed millions of dollars in unpaid rates and service charges. Government recently approved budgets of most councils proposing high percentage increases in rates and service charges and there are fears that more residents will default since many of them have been failing to pay old rates. Ratepayers are accusing councils of being insensitive to their plight given that many of them have been affected economically by the Covid-19 induced lockdown. Local Government and Public Works Minister, July Moyo, has said consumers and service providers need each other and must engage to iron out differences over rates and service provision. He said Government will not backtrack on the approved budgets. “We approved the budgets because we knew that they also need the money so that they continue providing services. The budgets have been approved by the Government as we know that councils need to continue running,” said Minister Moyo. “It is up to councils to review the tariffs as they know the difficulties faced by their respective residents. It is however prudent for people to continue paying their bills and if there is any problem, residents should engage council and map a way forward,” he said. Minister Moyo said President Mnangagwa was concerned about people who want to enjoy services but do not want to pay for the services. “President Mnangagwa has always emphasised that people should pay for the services rendered so that they continue getting the services,” he said. Bulawayo, Mutare, Victoria Falls and Kwekwe among others have hiked tariffs by between 300 and 800 percent.
The development has sparked outcry from residents who questioned the timing of the increases given that most sources of income have been closed by the lockdown. Some residents have threatened to stop paying the bills to protest against the ‘exorbitant’ tariffs. Cities like Kwekwe have remained adamant saying they are operating according to the approved budgets but Mutare responded to the residents’ plea by reviewing its tariffs downwards.