The Chronicle Nelias Shiri, Chronicle Reporter
THREE copper cable thieves who were arrested last week by Bulawayo police for allegedly stealing 45kg of overhead copper conductors worth US$900 were yesterday granted $5 000 bail each by Bulawayo magistrate, Stephen Ndhlovu. Lazarus Mhaka (37) and Melusi Ndebele (39) both of Pumula South suburb and Blessing Nyaude of Nketa 9 suburb were found in possession of 45kg overhead copper conductors at Nkau Motor spares in Kelvin North industrial site in Bulawayo. The trio allegedly ganged up and stole copper cables from Steel Force company yard in Belmont before hiring Oswald Mudzingwa (31), who ferried the copper conductors from Belmont to Nkau Motor spares. The two accused persons were later arrested while melting the copper cables at Nkau Motor spares premises by Bulawayo police after a tip off. Mr Ndhlovu granted each of the three applicants bail of $5 000 pending trial. The accused persons will appear in court on March 3,2021. Mr Ndhlovu ordered the trio to report once a week at Pumula police station and to continue residing at their given addresses until the matter was finalised. They were also ordered not to interfere with State witnesses as part of their bail conditions. The State which was represented by Mr Terence Chakabuda did not oppose bail, saying there were no compelling reasons warranting the three applicants’ continued detention and it is the constitutional right for every citizen to apply for bail. According to court papers, last Friday at around 8PM the trio hatched a plan and stole copper conductors at Steel Force company yard in Belmont. On the same day shortly before 10PM police received a tip off that Mhaka and Ndebele were melting copper cables at Nkau Motor spares. Police rushed to the scene and caught the duo red handed. The accused persons were requested to produce a licence or permit allowing them to deal in copper and they failed leading to their arrest and recovery of the copper cables. The accused were later handed over to CID Minerals Flora and Fauna unit−@ waydenaido