The Chronicle Joel Tsvakwi, Showbiz Correspondent
BULAWAYO-based dancehall artiste, author and scriptwriter, Taremeredzwa Kwangwari aka Tare True Defender has bemoaned lack of a breakthrough on his artistic works. Tare True Defender feels that he has been a victim of misfortunes as his projects in the past years have been failing to hit the streets despite what he described as concerted efforts to make his works get appreciated by fans. Quizzed what the challenge could be, he ruled out issues to do with finances but was quick to lay blame on lack of collaborated support from the music industry in the region, something he said is killing the talent in Bulawayo and its surrounding areas. According to Tare True Defender who is also a Zimbabwe Prisons and Correctional Service (ZPCS) officer, the Covid-19 pandemic has also adversely impacted on his arts career. He said the pandemic took its toll when he was shooting a drama series with ZBC and ZPCS titled Crimes and Strings forcing him to suspend the project. “As artistes, we’re always victims of unseen forces which are always beyond our control. Like for example, the pandemic, we can’t fight nature as we’re just human beings created by God so at times we just let go to allow His will to prevail. “Covid-19-induced lockdowns saw us stop the shooting of Crime and Strings and sadly, some of our fine cast has since left. This has been a serious challenge as I’m now in a fix trying to figure out how to replace them,” said Tare True Defender. Despite the many challenges, Tare True Defender remains optimistic. “Definitely when the situation normalises, we shall resume the project as I still have the blessings from my superiors and ZBC is also still interested.” Posting on his social media platforms, he revealed that his video Mai Nyasha is also giving him the consolation to keep going. “Mai Nyasha is doing well but I was supposed to drop yet another video, Pfuma Yenhaka whose plans went in vain due to Covid-19. Due to travel restrictions, the video shoot had to be postponed also,” he said. Pfuma Yenhaka narrates the suffering of children and the surviving wife after the death of the husband. — @joelTsvakwi.