The Chronicle Boitumelo Makhurane, Chronicle Reporter
ZIMBABWEANS have welcomed Government’s decision to roll out the Covid-19 vaccine that arrived in the country from China yesterday. The 200 000 doses of the Sinopharm Covid-19 vaccine donated by China arrived in the country early yesterday morning. Bulawayo residents were excited about the vaccine’s arrival saying there is now something to protect people from Covid-19.  Mr Mthandazo Mpofu an Emganwini suburb resident said the vaccine will help to save lives in the country. He said people must not be afraid to be vaccinated. Mr Mpofu said so far people have been taking drugs for other ailments that have side effects, but that has not stopped them from taking the life saving medicines. “We have been hoping for the vaccine and we are happy it has arrived. Like all other vaccines and drugs, a drug may have its side effects on some people, but we take them every time so why not this time when it could possibly save thousands of lives,’’ said Mr Mpofu. Another resident, Mr Prince Rwambiwa said Covid-19 has crippled businesses and the answer to recover lies in vaccines. “We are grateful to the donors for the vaccine,” he said.  Mrs Sibonginkosi Bhebhe said: “We cannot doubt the vaccine since no one has been vaccinated. We will know its effectiveness once it has been rolled out to a large number of people and we cannot dwell on rumours.”  Zimbabwe Nurses Association president Mr Enock Dongo said the coming of the Covid-19 vaccine is a welcome development to protect people from the virus. He also said health workers appreciate Government’s decision to prioritise frontline health workers. “We welcome the development by Government to prioritise frontline workers in receiving the Covid-19 vaccine. This shows that they value their frontline workers,’’ he said. He added that there is need for an awareness campaign before people are vaccinated. Mr Dongo said as health workers they have little information on the vaccine. “As the representative of nurses, we never had an opportunity to learn about the vaccine and how it is going to be rolled out. It is a challenge for frontline workers to get vaccinated while they have not been educated about the vaccine,” he added. “It is a challenge for us health workers to vaccinate people since we have no information about the vaccine side effects, and such questions can be asked by patient and we will not be able to confidently answer the questions because of lack of information’’, said Mr Dongo. He said those in the health sector must be educated on the vaccine to boost their confidence and be able to answer questions when vaccinating people. Yesterday, President Mnangagwa said more vaccines are on their way to Zimbabwe. “I received the first vaccine consignment from China. Let me again thank the Chinese government for this gesture of great humanity. I am happy that the second consignment of vaccines procured from China will be received in a few weeks’ time. Vaccines from Russia, India and the UK are also on the way,” he said. 