The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
WARRIORS coach Zdravko Logarusic finally named a bloated 38-member squad that will go into camp for the upcoming crunch Africa Cup of Nations (Afcon) qualifiers against Botswana and Zambia next month. The provisional squad includes six United Kingdom-based players that are unlikely to turn up for the fixture due to travel restrictions effected by that country to combat Covid-19. Aston Villa midfielder Marvelous Nakamba, the defending trio of Jordan Zemura of Bournemouth, Wigan Athletic’s Tendai Darikwa as well as Brendan Galloway, who is in Luton Town’s books, are doubtful turnups for the Warriors’ camp. Strikers David Moyo from Scottish side Hamilton Academical and Admiral Muskwe, who turns out for Championship side Wycombe Wanderers, complete the list of UK-based players. It is likely that UK players that might choose to come for duty and risk being quarantined when they go back are those who don’t command regular starting positions at their clubs. Warriors’ coach Loga should be commended for naming a big squad, an indication that the UK brigade isn’t indispensable. Divine Lunga, the Turkish-based pair of Teenage Hadebe and Alec Mudimu as well as Peter Muduhwa and Jimmy Dzingai are capable of forming a protective defence line. With Nakamba out, France-based Marshal Munetsi will be trusted to maintain the midfield shape alongside Warriors returnee Thabani Kamusoko in central midfield. Surprise inclusion Brian Banda of FC Platinum, who is among five local players called up for camp, is equally capable of competing for a place in central midfield that will also be contested by Butho Ncube of AmaZulu and seasoned Ovidy Karuru. Loga also included attackers Knowledge Musona and Khama Billiat, who are recovering from injuries. It is hoped that Musona and Billiat would have fully recovered by the time Warriors travel to Botswana. Striker Knox Mutizwa also makes a return to compete for a place upfront. Barring injuries in club games, France-based Tino Kadewere, who is having the time of his life at Lyon, will lead the attack. Some strikers called up are Prince Dube, Evans Rusike and Bulawayo Chiefs’ Farau Matare. Besides Banda and Matare, some locally-based players in Loga’s squad are Highlanders goalkeeper Ariel Sibanda, Bulawayo Chiefs’ Shadreck Nyahwa, Caps United defender Carlos Mavhurume and Dynamos midfielder King Nadolo. Warriors squad Goalkeepers
Talbert Shumba (Nkana) Tatenda Mkuruva (Michigan Stars) Ariel Sibanda (Highlanders) Martin Mapisa (Zamora CF)
Defenders
Jordan Zemura (AFC Bournemouth) Jimmy Dzingai (Nkana) Alec Mudimu (Ankaraspor) Teenage Hadebe (Yeni Malatyaspor) Divine Lunga (Lamontville Golden Arrows) Tendai Jirira (Detroit City) Tendayi Darikwa (Wigan Athletic) Brendan Galloway (Luton Town) Victor Kamhuka (Royal Malaysia Police) omario Matova (NK Solin) Peter Muduwa (Simba SC) Carlos Mavhurume (Caps United) Shadreck Nyahwa (Bulawayo Chiefs)
Midfielders
Marshall Munetsi (Stade de Reims) Marvelous Nakamba (Aston Villa) Butholezwe Ncube (Amazulu) Ovidy Karuru (Black Leopards) Khama Billiat (Kaizer Chiefs) Tafadzwa Rusike (Zesco United) Brian Banda (FC Platinum) King Nadolo (Dynamos) Kudakwashe Mahachi (SuperSport United) Thabani Kamusoko (Zesco United, Knowledge Musona (KAS Eupen) Tatenda Tavengwa (Harare City) Tanaka Chinyahara (Red Arrows)
Strikers
Terrence Dzvukamanja (Orlando Pirates) Tinotenda Kadewere (Olympique Lyonnais) David Moyo (Hamilton Academical) Admiral Muskwe (Wycombe Wanderers) Farau Matare (Bulawayo Chiefs) Knox Mutizwa (Lamontville Golden Arrows) Evans Rusike (SuperSport United) Prince Dube (Azam)