The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
THE late national hero Dr Joel Biggie Matiza was an architect of repute who is credited for designing some of the modern and culturally significant structures in the country which include the imposing Midlands Zanu-PF Convention Centre which is a replica of the Great Zimbabwe Monument. Located some 13 kilometres East of Gweru along Mvuma road, one might be forgiven to think they are at Great Zimbabwe Monuments as they tour one of the country’s finest structures designed by the late Dr Matiza. The late Minister also designed the Joshua Mqabuko International Airport, the Victoria Falls international Airport and the National Social Security Authourity (NSSA) building in Harare. In the Midlands province, the Convention Centre was constructed at the instigation of the then Defence Minister and now President Mnangagwa in preparation for the Zanu- PF Conference in 2012. It was built in record time of three months at a cost of US$2millon. Zanu- PF Midlands province is the only province with its own Convention Centre. Most of the structures at the site are circular in shape taking after the great enclosure of Great Zimbabwe, with bricks at the centre replicating the granite stones of the historical site. The Conference Centre is also littered with replicas of the Madzimbabwe’s Conical Tower, a signature of most sites designed by the late national hero. Besides being a tourist attraction, the Conference Centre also boasts of a 5 000- seater facility which can be used for wedding receptions, seminars, exhibitions, entertainment shows and other events. Midlands Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Larry Mavima, who was also the project manager under the banner Midlands Development Association, says the choice of the late Dr Matiza to spearhead the project was strategic. “We were faced with a huge task and time was not on our side. We were faced with a task to host a conference to be attended by 5 000 people. The task required just four months at most and yet we needed something that depicted our culture. The job required someone who was dedicated and committed to work under pressure and we settled for Dr Matiza,” said Minister Mavima. He said Dr Matiza then presented his initial design which met all the expectations and therefore required a few changes. Minister Mavima said the then Minister of Defence and now President Mnangagwa asked Dr Matiza to relocate to Gweru to monitor the project and give on the spot guidance. “I spent three months monitoring the progress. It was good working with Dr Matiza on such a project which depicts our culture in many ways,” he said. National Museums and Monuments of Zimbabwe Assistant Regional Director, Mr Clapperton Gutu said the designing of buildings depicting national monuments define the country’s cultural identity. “Architectural heritage reflects the development of society and its ability to adapt and meet functional and other needs. This has been done in several countries like Mexico, Japan and China to mention but a few. Here we did it with the greatest site which gave birth to the country’s name Zimbabwe,” he said. Mr Gutu said some public buildings and monuments built in Zimbabwe since the 1990s that have incorporated historical features include the Kingdom Hotel in Victoria Falls, the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe, the Joshua Mqabuko Nkomo Airport, the Robert Mugabe International Airport and the National Heroes’ Acre. “The Conical Tower represents a grain silo. In our tradition, a ruler receives tribute in the form of grain which he distributes to the needy, to his guests and widely to his subjects during times of drought. In this way, the grain bin is a symbol of authority and the generosity of the ruler, and of his role as provider, protector and father of his people. Thus, the tower symbolised the power of the state and its authority beyond the capital,” he said. Zanu- PF Midlands Provincial chairperson Engineer Daniel Mackenzie Ncube said Dr Matiza was an architect par excellence. He said the late Minister designed the Joshua Mqabuko International Airport and the Victoria Falls international Airport. “Yes, the architect was Dr Matiza. You can see his signature theme all over the external buildings. I did the engineering designs. He adopted the Great Zimbabwe as his architectural theme. All his public buildings had some variety of his theme. Take for example Victoria Falls Airport and Bulawayo Airport and the Convention Centre,” said Eng Mackenzie Ncube. “The nation grieves the loss of Dr Matiza, a dedicated son of the soil, distinguished architect, cadre of the liberation struggle, Zanu PF Mashonaland East Provincial Chairman and Minister of Transport and Infrastructural Development who worked tirelessly to transform infrastructure in the country in line with vision 2030.” Dr Matiza passed away on January 22 at St Anne’s Hospital in Harare after succumbing to Covid- 19 related complications. He was 60. Dr Matiza was buried together with national heroes Foreign Affairs Minister Dr Sibusiso Moyo and former Zimbabwe Prisons and Correctional Services Commissioner-General Major General (Retired) Paradzayi Zimondi at the National Heroes Acre last Wednesday. Eng Mackenzie Ncube said every architect adopts a theme because architects are like artists. “They have a peculiar design that becomes their signature design and that’s what Dr Matiza was good at,” he said. Eng Mackenzie Ncube said he did the foundations and structural elements of the Convention Centre. “Working with Dr Matiza was a pleasure. He was thorough and highly experienced. He took pride in his work and expected the whole design team to be equally committed to the task. Highly gifted fellow. I will miss him and so will a number of other professionals,” he said. Eng Mackenzie Ncube said President Mnangagwa was the brains behind the Convention Centre. “HE was the driving force in the building of the Centre. Once he sets his eyes on a particular mission he pushes hard to ensure success. President Mnangagwa single handedly raised the finances of the project despite a plethora of doubting Thomases. The overall cost was around US$2million,” he said. The zenith of Dr Matiza’s contribution to the development of Zimbabwe came with his appointment as the Minister of Transport and Infrastructural Development as he initiated various infrastructural projects. His enterprising and resourceful personality saw him implementing robust infrastructural projects that changed Zimbabwe’s landscape for the better. Some of the projects have since been completed and some are still work in progress. These among others include: Awarding of infrastructural projects to local companies and the use of local resources thereby building local capacity, creating jobs for the youth and opening up business opportunities for local entrepreneurs. Contributing to the architectural designs of the new Parliament of Zimbabwe building. Widening and upgrading sections of the Beitbridge-Masvingo-Harare highway to meet regional standards in preparation of its dualisation. Expansion and rehabilitation of Robert Mugabe International Airport. Vic Falls International Airport architectural designs and overseeing its successful completion. Ngundu-Tanganda Road rehabilitation. Rehabilitation of Birchenough-Chipinge-Mt Selinda Road. Reconstruction of the Cyclone Idai damaged roads and bridges in Chimanimani. Expansion and tarring of Mahuwe-Kanyemba road. Upgrading and modernising Beitbridge Border Post. Expansion and tarring of the Karoi-Binga Road.