The Chronicle Fairness Moyana in Hwange HUMAN remains believed to be that of a 35 year old Dete man killed in a suspected hit and run accident over the weekend while guarding his field from elephants were found about 3km into Sikumi Forestry. The body had been mauled by wild animals. According to sources, some herd boys stumbled on the remains on Sunday morning in Dopota. Although Matebeleland North police spokesperson, Inspector Glory Bandai could not shed light on the incident, Mabale ward councilor Joseph Bonds confirmed the grisly finding. “A body of a 35 year old man from Dopota area in Mabale was found this morning (Sunday) in the bush by some boys who were herding cattle. The man is believed to have been guarding his field against elephants when he was reportedly struck by a vehicle on Saturday night as he stood by the roadside. According to a fellow villager who witnessed the incident from a distance the vehicle did not stop. Body parts comprising of the rib cage, arms and legs were discovered some 3km into Sikumi Forestry area. The head of the deceased was crushed into a pulp on the road which seems to suggest that he was run over several times. I was one of the people who attended the scene,” said Cllr Bonda. He said the it was likely that after the accident hyenas that frequent the area at night in search of livestock came across the body before dragging into the bush and devouring it. “The hyenas devoured the body leaving behind the bones that were discovered by the herd boys.” Meanwhile in an unrelated incident, a 63 year old man from Nsongwa village in Dete was trampled to death by an elephant while herding cattle. The body of Akim Abion Nyoni was found on 11 February at Kamalala grazing area. “On 9 February 2021 deceased went to Kamalala grazing land intending to check on his cattle but did not return home. The following day his wife asked Tendai Ndlovu to make a follow up on the cattle after noticing that her husband did return home. On 11 February villagers were mobilised and conducted a search. At around 9am deceased was found near Kamalala dam. Police discovered that the body had a wound on the back indicating that he was gored and then trampled by an elephant,” said Insp. Banda. Since no foul play was suspected a post moterm was waived by Hwange resident magistrate, Mrs Barbara Phiri. Insp Banda called on villagers who live near the Hwange National Park to exercise caution while tending to their livestock. “As ZRP we are concerned by these deaths that occur as a result of animal attacks. We are appealing to members of the public to exercise caution when attending to thier livestock in the Forestry area because we are near Hwange National Park.” Animal attacks are very common during the haversting period in the areas close to the national park with villagers risking thier lives guarding thier fields against invasion by elephants or baboons. Livestock is also targeted by predators such as lions and hyenas which stray from thier habitats into the Communal lands resulting in human wildlife conflict.