The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
ASPIRING Highlanders chairman Johnfat Sibanda has noted the board’s decision to postpone both the annual general meeting and elections,but expressed concern that they were yet to be formally informed of the decision. In a statement released by his campaign manager Sikhumbuzo Mnkandla, Sibanda also dismissed allegations that his camp was pushing for an interim leadership at the club. Sibanda is challenging incumbent Kenneth Mhlophe for the top post in elections that were pushed back after the club’s request for permission to gather for both events was turned down by the authorities due to the Covid-19 Level 4 lockdown. The lockdown has been extended by a further two weeks up to February 15. “We read in the media about the postponement of the Highlanders annual general meeting and elections after the club failed to get authority from the Government. We fully appreciate the decision taken by our esteemed board in the health interest and safety of members because one life lost because of Covid-19 is a loss too many for us. “However, our concern is over the fact that since that announcement we are yet to be officially informed of the decision taken by the club through the board. While cognisant of the prevailing circumstances, we understand what could have been the cause behind the release of the press statement in the manner it was. Yet still, as a nominated candidate, we expected the board to communicate their decision and the way forward to us first for the sake of transparency,” said Mnkandla. He said they never called for an interim leadership at the club, saying those claims were being pushed by people out to soil their candidate’s good reputation. “We are also aware of rumours being circulated that we are calling for an interim leadership at the club until elections. I would like to dismiss the claims with the contempt they deserve. We will stand guided by the electoral processes and once the authorities ease lockdown restrictions, this will allow for the holding of the postponed elections. “In the meantime, we will continue to engage the Highlanders membership on the various fora and platforms as allowed under the lockdown rules to further our campaign agenda,” said Mnkandla in a statement yesterday.