The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
FIRST Lady Amai Auxillia Mnangagwa yesterday donated groceries to Khami Maximum Prison situated on the outskirts of Bulawayo, complementing Government’s efforts to improve welfare of inmates. The groceries include mealie-meal, rice, sugar beans and bars of soap. The donation was made through the First Lady’s Angel of Hope Foundation. Bulawayo Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Judith Ncube handed over the donation to Deputy Officer Commanding Zimbabwe Prisons and Correctional Services Bulawayo Province Assistant Commissioner Cleopas Moyo who commended Amai Mnangagwa for remembering the usually forgotten prisoners. “We want to acknowledge the donation by the First Lady Amai Auxillia Mnangagwa, we want to give a special thanks to our mother for embracing us with love and care by extending a valuable donation to us as an institution through her foundation, the Angel of Hope Foundation. The donation consists of various food items and laundry soap. These will go a long way in meeting our dietary needs and the soap will assist inmates in washing their clothes and also bathing,” said Asst Comm Moyo. “We are proud of our mother and she will always be our pride. She is leading by example by showing that loved ones who are under incarceration are always a part of us and we should not forsake them as a community. Inmates are not only the responsibility of the ZPCS but society has a role to play in positively contributing towards their successful rehabilitation and welfare. I urge stakeholders to take a cue from umama as inmates have a lot of needs.” Asst Comm Moyo said due to the increased population of inmates, ZPCS sometimes struggles to effectively provide resources for them. He said while Bulawayo province has a reasonable number of inmates, Khami Maximum Prison was overpopulated.
“There are some budgetary constraints that we sometimes grapple with and as such we cannot at times give them everything that they desire,” said Asst Comm Moyo. Khami Maximum Prison holds higher risk prisoners and there are 1 700 prisoners against the carrying capacity of about 1 500. “The province is however, not overpopulated as we have about 3 000 inmates against our carrying capacity of 4 000,” said Asst Comm Moyo. Minister Ncube also witnessed a donation from the Seventh Day Adventist Church comprising plates, cups and food containers. The donation is meant to ensure that prisoners do not share plates to mitigate against the spread of Covid-19. The donation was organised by the Dorcas Society, a department within SDA. “Today’s donation is in line with the current practices and requirements meant to curb the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic by ensuring that each inmate has his own plate and other utensils. The Government of Zimbabwe recognises the work being done by SDA in our communities and partnering with prisons in their endeavour to promote healthy lifestyles for inmates. On behalf of HIS Excellency, the President Cde ED Mnangagwa and on my own behalf I would like to express my appreciation and gratitude to the SDA Church for these initiatives and efforts made by the Adventist women, most of whom are far away but their hearts are with us here in Zimbabwe, more so at Khami prison,” said Minister Ncube. — @nqotshili