The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
WHEN the Zimbabwe Christian Alliance (ZCA) was formed in 2005, it faced resistance from some churches for what they termed deviating from Christian core duties and being involved in secular issues, ZCA director Reverend Useni Sibanda said. Rev Sibanda said some church bodies accused his organisation of not moving in faith alleging it was competing with institutions in the secular world. Fast forward to 2020 when the world had to battle to contain Covid-19, his organisation gained traction in fighting the infection particularly in Matabeleland region through various donations it had made to various centres. The outbreak of Covid-19 caught countries off-guard with various health centres ill-equipped to deal with the pandemic. The Government, private sector, civic society organisations and individuals had to step up efforts in fighting the invisible enemy which has killed more than 1 300 in Zimbabwe. The pandemic saw organisations such as ZCA complementing Government in fighting the pandemic through provision of resources. The organisation has consistently been donating sanitisers, disinfectants, face masks and other personal protective equipment (PPE) to health centres in the region in the fight against Covid-19. Rev Sibanda said his organisation is driven by the need to touch the most vulnerable in society who cannot afford expensive health care. “The reason why we formed the ZCA in 2005 was to focus on working for the common good. How do we ensure that the poor and vulnerable in our communities are always protected? How do we ensure that they get peace and justice? For us Covid-19 is not just a health crisis but it is a humanitarian crisis and also a social crisis. It brings about the inequalities that are there in society. It’s easier for the rich people to pay and go to private hospitals such as Mater Dei Hospital, they have medical aid, they have everything and they can try and fight it out. But for a poor person who is living in Makokoba and in the rural areas, they have absolutely no means,” said Rev Sibanda. “We realised that our public health facilities at the moment do not adequately meet the needs. That is why we have been concerned about how we meet the needs. We realised first that we need to equip quarantine and isolation centres as they were not fully equipped.” He said after making a needs assessment his organisation has been able to provide material resources in fighting Covid-19. “So, our concern had been that we get personal protective equipment for these people. We said how do we make them comfortable when they are admitted? Because an isolation or quarantine centre has to be as comfortable as possible so that they can realise that it’s better to be in the facilities than being at their own homes in the townships as being at home could expose their relatives to Covid-19. So, this has been our driving force to say we have to protect the poor and the vulnerable from the pandemic. Also, in terms of our local health facilities, they are not adequately resourced so we have started in our own small way to contribute to that,” he said. Recently, the organisation donated hospital beds to Thorngrove Infectious Disease Hospital and in the past donated to Ekusileni Medical Centre in Bulawayo. “As I speak to you now, we have equipped Plumtree District Hospital with solar, we have now equipped Beitbridge Quarantine Centre with solar as well. We are pumping water for Beitbridge District Hospital,” said Rev Sibanda. “So basically, we are saying how can we get the poor to get assistance as soon possible. We are hoping that it will help them in fighting the pandemic.” He said despite initial criticism, he believes ZCA is truly serving the works of God as it is putting its faith into action. “The journey has been difficult because initially the people in the church sector thought we are doing what was not expected of the church. They thought we were no longer walking the walk of faith. They just thought we were just doing non-governmental organisation or social work but our understanding of theology is that like the Good Samaritan parable that Jesus expects us before we rush to church which is the four walls which people want to be in, that the community outside is also our parish,” he said. “The community outside is also part of God’s concern so we work more outside. So we work in a church without walls, in the community and to transform communities. Initially most people did not understand us but now there has been a realisation by even the broader church bodies that what we are doing is a ministry to the church. We are there to be a witness for Christ.” Rev Sibanda said apart from contributing in fighting Covid-19 his organisation is involved in peace building initiatives across the country. His organisation has set up 45 peace committees across the country in a bid to resolve conflicts that may emanate in communities. -@nqotshili