The Chronicle Thupeyo Muleya, Beitbridge Bureau
THE Government has availed $40 million as initial funding for the District Development (DDF) to rehabilitate the road network in Matabeleland South’s seven districts. Some of the roads have been extensively damaged following the incessant rains received since the onset of the rains. Matabeleland South DDF co-ordinator, Mr Moment Malandu said they were expecting more funding and an additional grader to boost their capacity on the ground. He made the remarks during the official launch of the DDF Roads Maintenance Blitz at Mapani Village in Ward 6 under Beitbridge East Constituency. Mr Malandu said they had requested $229 million from the Government to rehabilitate roads and bridges in the province. The money, he said, will be used for spot gravelling, regrading, reshaping, working on culverts, piped drifts and construction of destroyed bridges. “We are now hard at work on the ground and the $40 million we have received so far will be used on preliminary road rehabilitation works in all major selected roads in Matabeleland South,” said Mr Malandu. He said they were hoping to get more equipment to enable them to speed up the works. “We have one grader that caters for the whole of Matabeleland South hence the urgent need for more equipment to enable us to speed up the rehabilitation work. When we use our own equipment we cut costs compared to using contractors,” said Mr Malandu. He said the target was to work on179km in Beitbridge, 63km in Umzingwane, 109km in Gwanda, 136km in Insiza, 119km in Matobo, 127km in Bulilima and 75km in Mangwe district. Matabeleland South Minister of State for Provincial Affairs and Devolution, Cde Abednico Ncube, who was represented by the acting provincial development co-ordinator, Mr Peter Mahlathini, said a good road network would enhance socio-economic development in the province. “As a province, we are thankful to the Government under the stewardship of President Mnangagwa for the timely intervention in the implementation of the blitz road maintenance programme through the District Development Fund,” he said. The minister said some areas in the province were unable to access administrative centres, health facilities, shopping centres or to transport their agricultural inputs due to the bad state of the roads. He challenged other road authorities including urban and rural councils and the ministry of transport and infrastructure development to emulate the ongoing efforts by DDF. Beitbridge East Member of Parliament, Cde Albert Nguluvhe said; “The rains have damaged most major roads in Beitbridge district ad this is affecting the movement of drought relief grain, the monitoring of Government projects and has also pushed up the cost of transport”. Headman Shadreck Muleya of ward 6, said the rehabilitation of the major roads, especially the Mapani-Tongwe-Lutumba Road was a relief to thousands of villagers. “This is commendable, we hope all the major roads in our district will get some facelift,” he said. — @tupeyo