The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
THE Sports Writers Association of Zimbabwe (Swaz) has joined a growing chorus by football stakeholders calling on Zifa to expedite the return of football, saying players, coaches and clubs are now reeling from financial ruin caused by the lengthy inactivity. The Premier Soccer League is leading the fight for the immediate return of domestic football, with a proposed competition for the restart. PSL plans to request US$100 000 from part of Fifa’s Covid-19 relief funds given to Zifa to pay staff salaries, rentals, stadia inspections, television production costs and other administrative costs. Furthermore, the PSL is also planning to engage Delta Beverages to sponsor the competition. Zifa has, however, remained mum on resumption of the local game. Already, a third wave of the Covid-19 virus is being predicted, meaning waiting for the pandemic to end is now out of the question. Plans have to be made on how football can be played in the midst of the pandemic. Not only are footballers and coaches struggling financially in this situation but clubs are also feeling the pinch. Already a year of football development has been lost and the greatest fear is that some clubs may collapse if a solution is not found. Dynamos have already expressed concern that they might lose their sponsorship deal with cigarette maker Remington Gold if the 2021 season does not kick-off. Highlanders and Caps united last year lost the NetOne sponsorship owing to the Covid-19 outbreak and Caps are struggling to pay players. Although Bosso have continued to pay their players, it’s unsustainable in the long run, especially if there’s no action this year. Swaz is among stakeholders calling on Zifa to facilitate the return of football with or without fans. “In view of the grim economic situation posed on the local football scene by the global coronavirus pandemic and the pain and anguish it has wrought on our footballers, Swaz is urging Zifa to make an urgent plea to Government to consider lifting the ban on football competitions. Swaz lauds the swift stance taken by our Government to impose a national lockdown in order to stem the further spread of the scourge. It was such a visionary approach that saw many lives being saved, including those in the sports profession where fatalities have been contained to a bare minimum,” Swaz wrote. “But Zifa needs to argue football’s case to the authorities and demonstrate that the sport can resume in as much as other services deemed essential are gradually reopening. Sport is no different from tourism in that the two provide a form of recreation and are a source of income to a wide diversity of our communities. While lives are important to save, livelihoods are also essential to protect,” wrote Swaz. — @innocentskizoe