The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Health Reporter
MORE than 110 000 women screened for cervical cancer — one of the leading causes of death in Zimbabwean women — last year and at least 77 percent of those who tested positive accessed treatment. Screening programmes for cervical cancer were decentralised to district levels despite challenges that were brought by Covid-19. Since March last year when the virus broke out in the country, 1 269 people have died and the global pandemic has brought a number of challenges in health care services. Despite the challenges, the Ministry of Health and Child Care under the guidance of Vice President Constantino Chiwenga managed to avail cancer medicines among other measures to address the prevalence of cancer in the country. In his speech to mark World Cancer Day, VP Chiwenga said his ministry had also included screening tools for cervical, breast and prostate cancer in the electronic health records to ensure robust follow up of cancer patients. World Cancer Day Commemorations are held annually on February 4 and this year’s event is running under the theme, “I am and I will campaign for Prevention, Detection and Treatment of Cancer”. Causes range from air pollution, obesity genetic disorders, lack of physical activity, alcohol, alcohol use, unhealthy diet without vegetable or fruit intake, sexually transmitted human papilloma virus, ultra-violet radiation and the use of tobacco and cigarettes. The World Health Organisation says cancer caused 9,6 million deaths in the world in 2018. At least one out of six deaths was caused by cancer, with 70 percent cancer deaths occurring in low and middle-income countries. “Let me acknowledge that cancer is one of the leading causes of death in Zimbabwe and therefore, citizens must come together and fight this epidemic. All of us must reflect individual commitment that resonates with this year’s theme which is “I am and I will,” said VP Chiwenga. “The local Cancer Registry 2016 shows that, a total of 2 751 people died of cancer in Zimbabwe. The threat requires humankind to raise awareness of cancer and advocate for its prevention, detection and treatment.” He encouraged members of the public to forego bad habits and celebrate the longevity of their God-given lives. “In year 2020, 110 686 women were screened for cervical cancer. Out of the 5 883 who tested positive, 4 561 were treated. The treatment rate stood at 77,5 percent,” said the VP. He said as part of measures to mitigate the effects of Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) the Ministry had dedicated a whole directorate to raise awareness, prevent, detect and treat the epidemics. “Part of the measures include the training of Oncologists and Oncology Nurses in Zimbabwe at the Parirenyatwa School of Nursing and College of Health Sciences, mass immunisation programme for HPV targeting girls aged between 10-14 years to protect them against development of cervical cancer,” he said. VP Chiwenga said the Ministry had also established a Cancer Registry, which is located at Parirenyatwa Group of Hospitals. “The institution is considered as one of the best in Africa in terms of collecting data for the burden of cancer. We also availed of radiotherapy treatment facilities at Parirenyatwa Group of Hospitals and Mpilo Central Hospital. My Ministry is also updating the Zimbabwe Cancer Prevention and Control Strategy, to make it mandatory for citizens to be screened for cancer in certain age groups,” he said. The strategy will ensure for example that men aged 40 and above test for prostate cancer. VP Chiwenga said the emergence of new strains of the deadly Covid-19 accelerated the progression of a second wave at the close of 2020 and beginning of 2021. Zimbabwe consequently recorded an upward trend in confirmed cases, active cases and deaths. He expressed gratitude to the Peoples’ Republic of China for their donation of the Covid-19 vaccine to Zimbabwe. VP Chiwenga said the gesture will achieve a milestone in combating the pandemic. “Furthermore, the Government of the Republic of Zimbabwe embarked on a deliberate programme to acquire more Covid-19 vaccines. My fellow Zimbabweans, let me reiterate that the Government of Zimbabwe will rollout Covid-19 vaccines for free, to all our citizens who may wish to be vaccinated. The policy is inspired by humane morals that, ‘Life should not be bought,” he added. Citizens were also urged to put up a spirited fight against NCDs like cancer, diabetes, HIV (Aids), hypertension and other chronic health conditions or injuries. “It is sad to note that patients beset with immuno-suppression — a condition caused by NCDs are more susceptible to Covid-19. According to the World Health Organisation, cancer is the ‘second leading cause of worldwide deaths,’ only surpassed by Covid-19, which recently doubled the casualty rate,” he said. — @thamamoe