The Chronicle Lingani Nyika, Chronicle Reporter
CURIO vendors in Victoria Falls have appealed to Government to cushion them as they are struggling to survive because of lack of business. Curio vendors are some of the informal traders largely dependent on tourism in Victoria Falls. Many of them lost business as a result of outbreak of Covid-19 and subsequent lockdowns. The tourism industry remains grounded due to international travel restrictions and business has continued to elude most businesses. A snap survey by Chronicle around various curio markets in Victoria Falls showed a gloomy picture of what used to be a viable informal business. Some of the curio markets are Sinathankawu, Busy Island, Thokozani and Lugwasyano Arts and Craft. One of the vendors Mr Qiniso Mpofu said he is struggling to put food on the table for his family. “We come here every day but our schedule has been to open shop, clean our curios and just sit as there are no clients at all. As I speak, I can’t even buy food for my family and the only hope I have is that this pandemic will end soon so the industry reopens. We wish Government or any well-wisher could help us either financially or with food hampers for our families,” he said. Another curio vendor Mr Philani Mpofu of Busy Island said his family will starve if he doesn’t get assistance. “This is a tough period for us. Our families will die if we don’t get help in this lockdown period,” he said. Mr Ephraim Sibanda who trades at Sinathankawu said some of the vendors had relocated to rural areas because they could not afford rentals anymore. Before lockdown, there were close to 1 000 male and female curio vendors at all the markets but now only a handful remain. Women operate from Lugwasyano Arts and Craft. “I think women are the worst affected because we have lost business and income while at home, we are expected to provide food on the table. We just come here but there are no customers. We have heard of some sectors getting help and that has eluded us here. In Victoria Falls we rely on tourism and the demise of the industry means no livelihood for us. We wish we could be considered for any grant or even compensated for the loss caused by Covid-19,” said one of the women who identified herself as Rachel.-@NyikaLingani