The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
URBAN local authorities in the country are now dysfunctional, a development that forced Government to constitute a committee led by Vice-President Constantino Chiwenga to address a myriad of problems emanating from their failure to provide services. In an interview while touring some illegal settlements in Gweru last Friday, National Housing and Social Amenities Minister, Daniel Garwe said Government — moved by the plight of residents who are faced with roads littered with potholes, burst sewer pipes and shortage of water — has taken it upon itself to get into local authorities to address lack of services. The minister said Government has noted with concern unending cases involving land barons and local authorities across the country allocating unsuspecting home seekers land on wetlands and river banks and has since activated all systems to protect people. “All our local authorities in the country are dysfunctional and Central Government has now taken it upon itself to get into the local authorities and get things moving in terms of the maintenance of roads. We now have a Disaster Management Committee to deal with all roads, not only state roads but even those in the local authorities, to deal with all dysfunctional water and sewer systems, to deal with everything that the local authorities have destroyed. Central Government has come in now and this is the beginning of good things,” he said. “There is a committee established by His Excellency beginning of this month to tackle the issues to deal with dysfunctional and irregular settlements, settlements in wetland areas and those in river banks and basins. Most of the country’s roads which have been badly damaged by the rains have also been declared as a state of emergency under the same Disaster Management Committee. The roads include those under local authorities. The committee is chaired by Hon Vice-President CGDN Chiwenga.” He said the Disaster Management Committee is also looking at coming up with housing schemes especially for residents who might be relocated after they were allocated stands on wetlands and near river banks. “This is an emergency and I can’t commit to figures right now but all I can tell you is that Treasury is supporting the programme, the private sector through the financial institutions are all on board in terms of funding all the housing initiatives that we are coming up with. This is the beginning of good things for our people in local authorities. So, there is will from the private sector to fund housing programmes going forward,” said Minister Garwe. Last week, Cabinet approved an Emergency Road Rehabilitation Programme and has budgeted US$400 million to finance corrective, preventive and restoration works over the next 36 months. Speaking at the post-Cabinet media briefing in Harare on Tuesday Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa said the programme was aimed at repairing roads damaged by the current rains as well as previous cyclones. Minister Mutsvangwa said the project will take up an initial US$80 million for emergency road works covering 60 days; US$120 million for preventive works spanning six months; US$120 million for rehabilitation and reconstruction works spanning six to 18 months and US$80 million for other related works spanning 18 to 36 months. On the other hand, the District Development Fund (DDF) has already embarked on road rehabilitation across the country and has set aside nearly $238 million for works in Midlands, Manicaland, Mashonaland West, Masvingo and Matabeleland South provinces. In Masvingo, DDF has started rehabilitation of roads across the province following heavy rains which left a trail of destruction.