The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Chronicle Reporter
PRETORIA Portland Cement (PPC) Zimbabwe and a Harare-based non-governmental organisation have chipped in with donations for the 108-year-old Bulilima man who lost his homestead in an arson attack last month. Various organisations and individuals have been donating to Mr Lewis Phiri and his family who were left homeless after all the four huts at their homestead were set ablaze by an angry boyfriend to one of the old man’s grandchildren. Family members could not salvage anything as the alleged assailant, Felix Moyo (25), threatened to kill anyone who attempted to enter the burning huts. Minister of State in Vice-President Chiwenga’s office Dr Evelyn Ndlovu, who is the Senator for Bulilima and Mangwe and has been part of the resources’ co-ordination sent a truck to deliver thatching grass to the family over the weekend. “My truck has transported some thatching grass for the kitchen but we still need more to finish the huts so that the family can have enough rooms. Besides the elderly there are children who are traumatised by what happened. Those who can, let’s support the family to compliment what has been done so far,” said Dr Ndlovu. Dr Ndlovu said bricks and more cement could assist the family to have a strong house that can withstand weather elements. Last week former Highlanders Football Club coach, Cosmas Zulu donated a suit to the 108-year-old grandfather from Tjinjika Village in Bulilima District following his cry that the arson attack resulted in his best suit which he wished to be buried in being burnt. PPC was approached with a request to donate eight bags of cement that will ensure plastering of the house is completed. The company’s sales and marketing manager Mr Nkosana Mapuma said PPC was touched by the centenarian’s story.
“As PPC Zimbabwe, our community means a lot to us and we were touched by what happened to a senior member of our Zimbabwean community. When contacted for assistance, we didn’t think twice about it as we believe that together we are stronger. We hope that the man and his family will find peace in their new home,” he said. A Harare NGO Africaid Zvandiri donated a bed, groceries and clothes to the family over the weekend which will bring relief to the old man as he lamented having to sleep on the floor. With the received donations, the two-bedroomed house which was under construction will be completed within days which will enable the family to have shelter. Several people both within and outside Zimbabwe have been donating in cash and kind to the family. Last month, a Zimbabwean based in Sweden, Mr Tichaona Maphosa pledged to give the family US$50 every month for a year and has since sent the first instalment as promised. Two WhatsApp groups were created in Zimbabwe and in South Africa to co-ordinate and mobilise resources to assist the family. Mr Derrick Ncube, who is co-ordinating resources in South Africa and has so far raised close to R10 000 hailed the support from well-wishers. “We set a target to build a two- roomed house and as of now with the donation from PPC we will finish the house in days. We have received a lot of support from well-wishers. We would have loved to build more rooms for them but our resources can only take us this far. We hope more people can chip in with thatching grass to renovate one or two huts which were burnt. With the new two- bedroomed house, we are grateful the family will have something durable,” he said. Those who want to help the family can get in touch with the old man’s granddaughter Miss Sibongile Nzimande on 0776572691. There is an option to take goods to Chronicle offices located at the corner of 9th Avenue and George Silundika Street in Bulawayo to be taken to the family.
@themkhust