The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
WARRIORS coach Zdravko Logarusic will have to rely on reports only to select his squad for the Africa Cup of Nations qualifiers next month after the Sports and Recreation Commission turned down Zifa’s request to play friendly matches. Zimbabwe take on Botswana and Zambia in matches they have to win to qualify for continental football’s showpiece.
The Warriors are second in Group H with five points from four games and will be away to third-placed Botswana on March 22. It’s highly likely that all foreign-based Warriors called up will fly directly to Botswana. On March 30, the Warriors will play host to bottom of the table Zambia in their final qualifier. Chipolopolo take on African champions Algeria, who top Group H with 10 points, on the same day the Warriors will be playing Botswana. According to Fifa calendar, there are no official dates reserved for friendly matches, meaning the SRC has spared Zifa the agony of seeking players’ clearance from their clubs. Due to the Covid-19 pandemic, called up players would have been required to leave their foreign bases early for camp, something their clubs would not have agreed to. Now Loga has to analyse players’ weekly statistics; that is if they play, for him to plan for the matches. Last week Warriors midfielder Marvelous Nakamba received rave reviews for his sparkling performance in Aston Villa’s Saturday 1-0 win against fading English giants Arsenal. Nakamba attempted 20 passes, completed 11 passes, won five ball recoveries and two clearances. Such statistics by a Warrior are what Loga hopes to read about until he assembles his squad. In South Africa, Knox Mutizwa also received good reviews in his Golden Arrows side’s 4-5 penalty shootout loss to 5-4 AmaZulu in the Nedbank Cup. Left-back Divine Lunga and midfielder Danny Phiri were also in action for Arrows. Former Bulawayo Chiefs and FC Platinum striker Perfect Chikwende made his debut league start for Simba while the duo of wingback Bruce Kangwa and striker Prince Dube were in the starting line-up for Azam in the Tanzanian topflight. – @ZililoR