The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
AN injury picked up at the beginning of January has seen Warriors’ captain Knowledge Musona’s quest to reignite his career in Europe suffering a setback, as he has missed seven games for his Belgian side AS Eupen. Before the injury picked up on January 6 in his side’s 4-1 loss to Genk, the Zimbabwe skipper, on a season’s loan from Anderlecht, had only missed one match out of 19. With the Warriors set to participate in the Afcon qualifiers next month, national team coaches will be hoping Musona recovers in time to return to action to lead Zimbabwe’s campaign. Another key national team player, who was inactive at the weekend due to injury, is Kaizer Chiefs’ Khama Billiat. The forward watched as Chiefs were downed 1-2 arch-rivals Orlando Pirates in Saturday’s Soweto derby. Former Warriors’ midfielder Willard Katsande came from the bench for Chiefs and marked his presence with an assist for Daniel Cardoso to score Amakhosi’s consolation. Striker Terrence Dzvukamanja was an unused substitute for Pirates in their Soweto derby triumph. National team goalkeeper Elvis Chipezeze sat on the bench in Baroka’s 1-1 draw against Cape Town City, while the pair of wingers Kudakwashe Mahachi and Evans Rusike came in the second half for SuperSport United in their 1-1 draw with Swallows. Another goalkeeper George Chigova didn’t make the SuperSport matchday squad. Left-back Ronald Pfumbidzai was sent for an early shower after picking a second yellow card in the 62nd minute of his Bloemfontein Celtics’ 1-0 victory against forgotten former Warriors’ shot stopper Washington Arubi’s TTM, while Ovidy Karuru played the full match as his Black Leopards were hammered 0-3 by TS Galaxy. Knox Mutizwa scored the winner for Golden Arrows when they pipped Maritzburg United 2-1 in a KwaZulu-Natal in Durban. Warriors’ left-back Divine Lunga, who is being linked with a move to Mamelodi Sundowns, played every minute of the encounter for Arrows, while defensive midfielder Danny Deco Phiri returned to the field for the first time from a five-month injury lay-off. Ex-Tsholotsho defensive midfielder Butholezwe Ncube was thrust in the game in the 60th minute for AmaZulu in their 2-1 win over Stellenbosch. In Turkey, Teenage Hadebe was substituted in the 72nd minute in a game his side Yeni Malatyaspor drew 1-1 with Fatih Karagumruk. Marshal Munetsi, who was being linked with a deadline day move to Derby County in the second tier English Championship, missed his second consecutive match for French Ligue 1 side Stadde Reims when they went down 0-1 to Strasbourg. Tino Kadewere, who has nine Ligue 1 goals for championship chasing Olympique Lyon, played 72 minutes in his team’s 2-1 win against Bordeaux. Lyon are second on the table with 46 points from 22 outings and trail leaders Lille by three points. Kadewere’s side enjoys a one-point lead over star-studded PSG. Meanwhile, the Zimbabwean pair of Kelvin Moyo and Gilroy Chimwemwe marked their arrival in the Zambian league in style by inspiring Nkana FC to a 4-0 thrashing of Young Green Eagles on Sunday. The duo joined the Zambian side placed 12th on the 18-team league table on Saturday. Moyo reportedly signed a six-month contract, while details of Chimwemwe’s contract were unavailable. The duo will get a chance to market themselves on the continental stage, as Nkana, coached by former Highlanders gaffer Kelvin Kaindu, are competing in the Caf Confederation Cup. — @ZililoR