The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
GERMANY-based rapper Awa Khiwe, recently hospitalised following a lung infection says she is now recovering at home. The rap Queen yesterday said being hospitalised served as a wakeup call and also showed her the importance of going to the doctor for regular medical check-ups. “I’m getting better and recovering at home where I’m taking my medication. What I’ve learnt from this encounter is that it’s important to go for check-ups and take good care of our bodies, especially the respiratory system. We might have diseases we may not know about that can lower our chances of surviving Covid-19 if we catch it so it’s important to have these checks,” she said. Due to her illness, Awa said she had to undergo Covid-19 tests. She said she was quite relieved when she learnt that she did not have the deadly virus. “When my Covid-19 test results came back negative, I relaxed because I thought it was just a flu. However, I was shocked when the doctor told me that I had a lung infection. He also told me how important it was for me to have regular check-ups just to be sure that my body is fit and healthy. Therefore, I’d like to encourage us all to go for check-ups,” said Awa. The talented rapper who wowed fans late last year with a teaser of her Ngeke Bengimele track that is now topping charts, said she is now working with producer Ghanaian Stallio on her EP titled The Village Girl. She hopes to release the EP as well as an album sometime this year. “I’m releasing an EP (The Village Girl) and an album (African Women Arise) this year. The album was supposed to be released last year, but we encountered challenges and had to postpone. I’m also planning on having a lot of collaborations and music videos. “This year, I want to release a lot of content so people should be on the lookout for great works,” said Awa who had stopped making music for a while but announced her return last year. Other than music, Awa shared plans of publishing a book which will be about her life journey. “I am writing a book that’ll be titled the ‘The Village Girl’. The book will be about my life journey, love life, spiritual beliefs, mistakes, struggles and music career. I hope my journey will inspire those who wish to follow the same path and help them learn from my mistakes. “I’m not sure when it’ll be published because there are many projects I’m working on, but definitely I’ll try to push it for this year as well,” she said. It seems her illness gave her a much needed wakeup call as the artiste now has a drive to do a lot of things. This comes as she is also working on a documentary. “I’m also working on a documentary so it’s going to be a busy year. I want to tell my own stories while I still can. We’re living in dark times, surrounded by death and that gave me a wakeup call. I realised that I don’t have forever hence my decision to start with whatever I have and share my story.” – @mthabisi_mthire.