The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter
GOVERNMENT has approved a US$400 million Emergency Road Rehabilitation Programme with an initial US$80 million set aside for emergency road works covering 60 days. Incessant rains that have been pounding the country for the past months have worsened the damage on the roads leading Government to declare a State of Disaster to enable resource mobilisation. In her post-Cabinet media briefing yesterday, Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa said the Emergency Road Rehabilitation Programme consists of corrective, preventive and restoration works which will be completed over a period of three years. “On the repair of roads damaged by the current rains as well as previous cyclones, Cabinet approved an Emergency Road Rehabilitation Programme consisting of corrective, preventive and restoration works. The project will take up an initial US$80 million for emergency road works covering 60 days,” she said. “One hundred and twenty million United States dollars is for preventive works spanning six months, US$120 million for rehabilitation and reconstruction works spanning six to 18 months and US$80 million for other related works spanning 18 to 36 months.” Minister Mutsvangwa said the restorative works will cover all urban areas as well as rural and trunk roads. She said the bad roads rendered some places inaccessible, thereby cutting them off from amenities. Government has been mobilising funds for the repair and rehabilitation of the country’s roads abandoned for long by local authorities and have now become death traps for the travelling public. Although the Zimbabwe National Road Administration (Zinara) collects road toll fees, it then disburses the funds to local authorities, most of which have been found wanting as they divert the funds instead of maintaining roads. Meanwhile, Minister Mutsvangwa announced that this week Cabinet approved the Principles of the Proposed Zimbabwe Construction Industry Council Bill, 2019, which were presented by the Minister of National Housing and Social Amenities Daniel Garwe. The Bill will establish a Construction Industry Council which will regulate the built environment by ensuring registration and monitoring of the construction companies carrying out work in the country. The Zimbabwe Construction Industry Council Bill will provide for the establishment and composition of the Construction Industry Council (ZCIC). “The Bill will go a long way in restoring sanity in the construction industry and providing recourse to the general public, who more often than not are on the receiving end at the hands of unscrupulous contractors. It will also enforce adherence to building standards and by-laws in the construction industry,” she said. “The ZCIC Bill will provide for the recognition of the disadvantaged and marginalised members of society, including women and the youth, war veterans and the physically challenged, to participate in locally funded projects up to a certain threshold without compromising on quality of materials and workmanship.” Minister Mutsvangwa said the awarding of 100 percent preference to domestic and Zimbabwean owned companies for locally funded public works up to $1 billion. She said the Bill also seeks to establish partnerships between foreign companies and local ones on public projects which are foreign funded. It will also ensure the compulsory registration of all construction companies by the Council. — @mashnets