The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
CHIEF Vezi Maduna Mafu will be buried today at his rural home in Avoca, Filabusi in Insiza District, after Government accorded him a State-assisted burial. Chief Maduna (86) died on Saturday at his rural home after battling with diabetes for years. Maduna family spokesperson Mr Zwelithini Dlamini yesterday said mourners attending his burial should adhere to Covid-19 prevention measures. “On behalf of the Chief Maduna family we wish to confirm that the burial of the late Chief Vezi Maduna will be held on Wednesday 17 February 2021 at the Maduna homestead in Avoca, Filabusi. All attendees are advised to wear their face masks properly and observe social distancing. This is a State-assisted burial,” said Mr Dlamini. Chief Maduna has been described as an illustrious leader who contributed towards liberating the country and served in various developmental portfolios in Matabeleland South. He was also the first chairperson of Insiza Rural District Council. Government has mourned his death describing it as blow to the traditional leadership institution. Matabeleland South Province had recommended that he be declared a national hero as there was a consensus in the province that his works befit such status. Local Government and Public Works Minister July Moyo and Matabeleland South Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Abednico Ncube on Monday visited the Maduna homestead to pay their condolences. Minister Moyo said Chief Maduna would be remembered for his political activism before the country attained its independence in 1980 and his contributions towards development. He said the Presidium had been notified regarding Chief Maduna’s death. “The late Chief will be remembered for his immense contribution in both the political and social development of this country. We are all aware that he was an ex-detainee who fought for the emancipation of this country. He served in various portfolios that include being the first chairperson of Insiza Rural District Council, Central Committe member as well as a member of the Joint Central Committee. Chief Maduna was also Senator Chief for Insiza, a member of the National Consultative Assembly for Zanu-PF and also served as the chairperson for Matabeleland South Provincial Assembly of Chiefs,” said Minister Moyo. “He was very instrumental in the development of the province as he facilitated the implementation of various projects in the sectors of health, education, agriculture and infrastructural development.” Chief Maduna is survived by his wife Mrs Lizzie Maduna Mafu (nee Mpala), 11 children and 28 grandchildren. He had served as chief since 1974. — @nqotshili