The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent Ratepayers in Kwekwe have threatened not to pay their council bills in protest against ‘exorbitant’ charges recently effected by the local authority. Kwekwe City Council recently hiked tariffs by more than 500 percent in line with their approved US$46 million budget for 2021. But the move did not go down well with most ratepayers who are questioning the timing of the effecting of the tariffs. Ratepayers used various platforms to air out their disgruntlement over the issues with some saying they have no option but to boycott the payment of the bills. Among issues raised by the ratepayers include the hiking of tariffs during COVID-19 lockdown and that council was using estimates as meter readers were not going round. Kwekwe Residents and Ratepayers Association (KRRA) Secretary General Mr Alex Homela said the budget was submitted to the ministry without much input form the ratepayers. “We are not happy about the budget that was done without any public consultations. There was no input by the residents and we are not happy about that. If it means us as residents not paying in protest then so be it. Where can one find such figures that are being given to people?” he rhetorically quizzed. He said the association will meet and map a way forward on the matter. Another resident, Mbusi Moyo took to Facebook to air out his disgruntlement. “Where on this planet will we get money to pay the water bills that have been raised by Kwekwe City Council? They know very well that we can not even afford a plate of sadza daily and we are in lockdown. How do they want us to survive? Were there any consultations made anyway?” wrote Moyo. Another resident Thandoyenkosi Moyo said,” go and tell the council that povo yaramba (the residents have refused), we will not pay those ridiculous amounts.” Kwekwe Mayor Councilor Angeline Kasipo said the hiking of tariffs was in tandem with the budget that was given the nod by the government. “When we did the budget in December 2019, the rate was at 1:1. They started falling during the course of 2020 and rendered the figures useless hence the increment,” she said. She said inflation was 800percent during the time adding the budget consultations were done although only a few residents attended. “We have timelines in which we should submit the budget to the parent ministry so we had no option but to submit the budget with a few submissions from the ratepayers,” said Cllr Kasipo. She urged ratepayers to approach the council for payment plans saying boycotting was tantamount to shooting selves in the foot. She also urged the residents to own up or risk losing service delivery due to lack of resources. “Our residents need water and other services during lockdown and if they fail to pay, those who offer us services also need to be paid and we have no other source of income. Water turbidity is at its highest this time of incessant rains and requires more chemicals and the prices have since gone up,” she said. She said the council was looking at bolstering its meter reading staff and said plans were underway to introduce prepaid water meters.