The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter ZIMBABWE Cricket (ZC) says the postponement of Ireland’s incoming tour was due to scheduling challenges and not the prevailing Covid-19 situation in the country. On Monday, Ireland Cricket said it had been advised by ZC that the tour cannot proceed as scheduled due to Zimbabwe’s Covid-19 situation. However, ZC clarified in a statement yesterday that the postponement had nothing to do with the Covid-19 situation in Zimbabwe. “Following a statement released by Cricket Ireland on Monday concerning the postponement of Ireland’s proposed tour to Zimbabwe for a men’s six-match limited-overs series, ZC wishes to clarify the circumstances surrounding the postponement. Due to the disruptions caused by the Covid-19 pandemic across the world, not in Zimbabwe in particular, ZC, like other boards elsewhere, has been forced to readjust its domestic and international cricket calendar. “With Zimbabwe scheduled to face Afghanistan men away and Pakistan men at home, between March and April, accommodating the Ireland series in between the two aforementioned tours, as had been proposed, was unfortunately not going to be feasible. Postponement of the proposed Ireland tour was due to scheduling challenges and had nothing to do with the ‘ongoing Covid-19 situation in the country’. “The Government is happy with the bio-secure measures that we put in place in order to greatly minimise the risk of Covid-19 spreading among players and officials and has since granted us permission to resume playing international cricket. That is why ZC is currently hosting the Pakistan women’s team for three one-day matches and three T20I games at Harare Sports Club before the Zimbabwe men’s side embark on a tour to Afghanistan for two Tests and three T20Is.” The Chevrons are presently preparing for a series against Afghanistan to be played in Abu Dhabi at the beginning of next month. It will mark the first time Zimbabwe and Afghanistan play each other in Test cricket following the granting of Test status to the Afghans in June 2017.