The Chronicle Chronicle Reporter VICE-President Kembo Mohadi has distanced himself from what he termed “imagined immoral unions”, saying the alleged illicit relationships with two married women are false and well-choreographed to demean and soil his image as a national leader and patriot. VP Mohadi has lately been a victim of vindictive media peddling falsehood on various social media platforms. In a statement, VP Mohadi categorically dismissed the allegations levelled against him and thanked President Mnangagwa for entrusting him with the huge responsibility to deputise him under the New Dispensation. “Fellow Zimbabweans, following the recent social media hype about my alleged illicit relationship with two married women, I have decided to come open and respond to the allegations being peddled by my destructors. Despite growing impatient because of days of weird character assassination, I wish to categorically state that the allegations being levelled against me are not only false, but well-choreographed to demean and soil his image as a national leader and patriot,” he said. The Vice-President said faceless netizens, which have blended well networked digital architecture to reengineer the spaces for political demonisation, will not dampen my spirit. VP Mohadi said his right to privacy has been trashed in terms of Section 57 (d) of the Constitution. Section 57 (d) reads: “Every person has the right to privacy, which includes the right not to have the privacy of their communication infringed…” VP Mohadi said despite the density of the allegations being levelled against him, he salutes the support from fellow citizen, colleagues and comrades who fully grasped the rigid complexities of fictional enemy attack. “It is against this backdrop that I am categorically distancing myself from imagined immoral unions. The camaraderie and support given to me during this trying hour is greatly appreciated,” he said. “That these faceless netizens have blended well networked digital architecture to reengineer the spaces for political demonisation, will not dampen my spirit as a tried and tested cadre. I remain a committed leader, father, cadre and servant of this great nation.”