The Chronicle Prosper Ndlovu GOVERNMENT is weighing legal reform options in the wake of the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR) as the country sets out to enhance productive capacities and expand its reach into the global market through instilling confidence in all stakeholders. The fourth industrial revolution brings with it several technologies such as artificial intelligence, internet of things, robotics, virtual reality, the cloud, and 3D printing, which present vast opportunities in the entirety of the economy. Digital transformation, thus, is a key Government strategy in not only adapting to the Covid-19 pandemic and its effects but also in taking advantage of the new opportunities in transforming Zimbabwe’s economy. While the level of utilisation of 4IR technologies is not currently widespread in Zimbabwe, ICT, Postal and Courier Services Minister, Dr Jenfan Muswere, says vast opportunities could be derived from adoption of such technologies for positive impact in various sectors of the economy. Speaking at a recent virtual 4IR Summit, the minister said creating a digital economy was one of the national priorities towards achievement of an upper middle-income economy status by 2030. Already the National Development Strategy (NDS1: 2021-2025), envisages a digital economy, digital government and an increasingly digital society. “As the country moves towards becoming an upper middle-income society by 2030, we need to adopt a completely new approach and exploit the potential of ICTs by developing appropriate and cost-effective applications that can improve the country’s productivity and competitiveness,” said Dr Muswere. “Internet of things and drone technologies are expected to be central to the future of agriculture. 3D printing is expected to transform manufacturing. Automation of jobs due to artificial intelligence and robotics will also cause tectonic transformations in the Zimbabwe labour market. Blockchain technology will increasingly find applications in the financial markets and even international trade.” The minister said the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic has necessitated the aggressive digital investment as a means to increasing broadband connectivity to the generality of every Zimbabwean. “Data has become the oil that lubricates all sectors of the economy and facets of life. One of the most exciting possibilities in this era is achieving efficiency in e-commerce, which is inextricably attached to the government’s objectives under the “Ease of doing business” initiative,” said Dr Muswere. “It is the next level, which has been accelerated by the pandemic, and all sectors of our economy have embraced, in an impressive fashion, conducting business online.” He said the impact of these technological changes has the potential to ripple across industries, businesses and communities, affecting not just how societies work but also how people live and relate to one another. However, given the rapid changes that are now a permanent feature in the technological space, Dr Muswere said regulating the ICT sector has become a menacing challenge to all involved. He said the Government was committed to playing its oversight role as well as providing a forward looking and adaptable policy environment for the ICT sector. Zimbabwe has already developed an all-inclusive and forward-looking guideline – The Smart Zimbabwe 2030 Master Plan – that clearly articulates how the country will develop, deploy and manage ICTs across all sectors. The blue-print works through key specific sector-focused integrated pillars that act as smart solutions. These cover virtually all major aspects of Government and private sector operations and are anchored on a strong foundation or common platforms at policy, regulation, standards, security and partnerships.