The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent
There was no glitz and glamour at the 2021 Zimbabwe Music Awards and the virtual space where the awards took place, had a lot of disapprovals. Some people were not happy about how the awards, meant to honour music excellence and creativity in the country, were structured from the nominees to the ultimate winners. There might however, be a ray of hope as Cool Crooners and Busi Ncube were rewarded for their sterling work in the music industry. Cool Crooners, the Bhulugwe Lami hit-makers were awarded the Lifetime Achievement Award and Busi Ncube, the Zim Retro Icon Award. These old singers have been toiling for a very long time and it was very befitting that they were rewarded for their efforts. Busi Ncube’s track True Love is still a hit despite the fact it was released many years ago. The song has transcended generations. Cool Crooners started singing before Zimbabwe attained independence and they have stood the test of time. They have lost some of their members due to old age. It was sad to hear the Cool Crooners pour their hearts out four years ago saying that they are only remembered when they die. This was at the funeral of one of their members, Abel Sithole. This is what we have become, we have a tendency of remembering our icons when they are on the brink of death or have passed on. Imagine after 50 years in the arts industry and shaping Zimbabwe’s arts, culture and music, the year you get recognised, the only thing to show for it is a gong and perhaps some money that comes with it, just enough to buy a week’s supply of groceries. Although these awards come with recognition and honour, they should at least come with something tangible for the artistes. Something life-changing! Zima organisers tried to do this with the late Cde Chinx when they built a house for him after honouring him with a Lifetime Achievement Award in 2014, but the man died before he could enjoy his house. He received the house in May, 2017 and died in June that year. The Lifetime Achievement Award and Zim Retro Award should at least have an asset that can change lives of those awarded.