The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Gwanda Correspondent
ARTISTES from Matabeleland South have honoured the late revered Chief Vezi Maduna Mafu through artistic projects. Chief Maduna died last Saturday at his Avoca homestead in Filabusi, Insiza District, Matabeleland South province. He was 86 and served as chief for 46 years. Following his death, artistes in the Rainbow Province decided to honour the legend through poems and musical tracks. Among them are poets Thaluso Da Poet and Prince Mazilankatha from rural Gwanda and Jonathan Moyo who is based in Lupane. Together, they penned soul touching anthologies on the province’s father, grandfather, great-grandfather, uncle and role model to many. Musicians Zhezhingtonz, Skollah and Demed also teamed up for an Afro-pop track titled Maduna that was released on Monday. The track was produced by DJ Drumz at X Studios with Drivo of Time project being the executive director. Said Drivo: “The musical track can be found on all Gwanda Magazine social media pages and will be spread across online arts platforms. With this track, we feel we would have done justice in terms of honouring Chief Maduna as an icon he was. “He was a principled leader who was very cautious about issues to do with safeguarding and preserving our culture. The void he has left shall never be replaced and we’ll uplift his legacy through promoting arts and culture the way he would have wanted it to be done.” Mazilankatha said: “I felt obliged to honour the chief because of his humility and the role he played in my life as he made me embrace our culture.” Thaluso Da Poet said people need to continue with the work the chief was doing in terms of upholding and preserving culture. “As a cultural poet who is driven by the need to ensure our culture stands firm, I felt the need to appreciate someone we viewed as a patron. As a community, we need to appreciate all his work through celebrating his life and not grieving,” he said. Chief Maduna is survived by wife, Mrs Lizzie Maduna Mafu (nee Mpala), 11 children and 28 grandchildren. – @mthabisi_mthire