The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
GOVERNMENT has floated a tender for the survey works for the 260km water pipeline route from Gwayi-Shangani Dam to Bulawayo. The Government has this year allocated $4,5 billion towards the Gwayi-Shangani Dam project which is expected to be completed before the end of next year. Construction works done at the dam site so far are at 39 percent and Government is already moving towards the second phase of the project which is the construction of the 260km pipeline from the dam to Bulawayo and pump stations along the pipeline. Government is inviting bids for Aerial Topographical Survey Services for the pipeline route from the dam to Bulawayo. The dam is expected to start holding water by the end of the year. The Zimbabwe National Water Authority (ZINWA) has said it expects Gwayi-Shangani Dam construction works to resume in April as Chinese engineers involved in the project are expected back in the country by the end of next month after they failed to return to the country last year due to Covid-19 induced travel restrictions. In a statement, the Ministry of Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Fisheries, Water and Rural Resettlement yesterday said it was opening up the tender for Aerial Topographical Survey Services for the pipeline route from the Gwayi-Shangani Dam site to Bulawayo. The bidding is only open to local companies. “The Government of Zimbabwe is implementing the National Matabeleland Zambezi Water Project which has three phases. Phase one is the ongoing construction of the Gwayi-Shangani Dam and Phase two is construction of a 260km pipeline and pumping stations linking the Gwayi-Shangani Dam to Bulawayo. The third phase is the construction of the bulk water abstraction infrastructure on the Zambezi River and a linkage to the pipeline. The Government of Zimbabwe has allocated resources to the Ministry of Lands, Agriculture, Fisheries, Water and Rural Resettlement for the commencement of the construction of Phase 2 component of the National Matabeleland Zambezi Water Project during the 2021 financial year,” read the statement. It said Zinwa, the engineer for the project, was inviting suitable companies to provide Aerial Topographical Survey Services for the pipeline route from the Gwayi-Shangani Dam site to Bulawayo. The ministry said it will be compulsory for prospective bidders to visit the site where the pipeline will be constructed.
Prospective bidders will be expected to meet in Bulawayo at the corner of Siyephambili Drive and Victoria Falls Road next Friday where they will proceed to Cowdray Park-Nyamandlovu up to Gwayi Shangani Dam. The Ministry said tender bids will be closed on March 5. Gwayi-Shangani Dam is located in Hwange District and upon completion is set to also benefit Binga and Lupane districts, Bulawayo as well as communities along the pipeline. The completion of the dam and the pipeline is viewed as the permanent solution to Bulawayo’s water crisis. Plans are underway to establish a green belt between Bulawayo and the dam as communities staying along the pipeline will have access to water for irrigation. — @nqotshili.