The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Chronicle Reporter
SOME Zimbabweans based in Canada have donated groceries to needy Entumbane suburb residents in Bulawayo.
Forty families received groceries which include 20 kgs mealie meal, 4 litres cooking oil, 2kg rice, 2kg sugar, 2kg flour, 1 green-bar soap, 500g salt and 500g beans. A member of the donating team, Miss Patience Moyo who lives in Hamilton, Ontario in Canada said the Covid-19 pandemic has affected many people, hence their decision to support their compatriots back home. “This is the fourth time we are making such a donation with my family and friends. We really did not want this publicised because we are not doing it for fame but we are moved to assist the needy and vulnerable members of the community back home,” she said. Miss Moyo said they made the first donation after her parents who had visited her in Canada some few years back appealed for assistance for their church members who were failing to make ends meet. “The motivation this time around is because there is a pandemic going on and there is so much hunger, vendors can’t sell because of lockdown. My job entails assisting the needy in Canada and I thought of how our people back home were doing. Because of God’s blessing we are still able to work despite these challenges. I thought we must do something,” she said. Miss Moyo said she used the incentive she was paid by the Canadian government, her employer to donate to the needy. She also mobilised her friends to also do the same as a way of thanking God for their blessings during these difficult times. Pastor Caleb Moyo of the Seventh Day Adventist Church in Entumbane hailed the gesture. “We thank you friends for remembering our needy in our community. A complete kitchen of basic groceries was provided to the members. The Bible says it is more blessed to give than to receive. We pray God gives you more strength to continue with your good works,” said Pastor Moyo. One of the beneficiaries, Gogo Malusinga said life is not easy for the elderly as there are few people who have enough to spare. “I have been struggling even before lockdown but with this donation I will have peace of mind as I could not even sleep as I did not know where my next meal would come from,” she said. Gogo Malusinga said she was glad the rains have been good as she will harvest something from her small piece of land nearby. Mr Raphael Tholo said the donation came at the right moment for him. “I work as a security guard in a community garden and providing for my family has been a struggle for me. Receiving this donation is really a prayer answered,” he said. Another resident who received the donation, Mr Zephaniah Moyo said he could not manage to move around looking for a job as he used to do because of the lockdown. “I do mainly carpentry but due to the lockdown I could not get work to do as everything has been closed. It’s difficult when you have a family looking up to you for support. While I understand the reason for the lockdown, I wish there was support for the self-employed,” said Mr Moyo. -@themkhust