The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
IT has always been a childhood dream for 23-year-old Fitpreneur, Muzingabo Nkosana Nxumalo to appear on the small screen. Little did the fitness freak, popularly known as Ngamla, know that he would land on South Africa’s national television broadcaster, SABC. Born and bred in Lobengula West suburb in Bulawayo, Nxumalo also grew up in Tembisa, Johannesburg. He would shuttle between the two countries time and time again before eventually settling for his desired paradise in the neighbouring country. With no acting background, the Mawaba Primary School and Masotsha High School student shot to fame this year when he got a role on one of Southern Africa’s most watched soapies, Rhythm City. He made his debut appearances on January 28 and 29 where he played the character Scelo Ndaba, a construction worker. Saturday Leisure managed to track down Ngamla who was proud of his role on the e.tv soapie saying he aced it without a benefit of doubt. “Everything started in October when my Fitpreneur manager approached me about a certain role on Rhythm City that required guys who were fit and ready for auditions. “As a Fitpreneur who has the mandate to transform people’s bodies, I took up the courage and went for auditions and landed the role of Scelo Ndaba,” Ngamla said. He said he was amazed how his fitness career led him to fulfil his dream of appearing on TV screens. “It had always been my childhood dream to see myself on TV one day and I’m grateful that my fitness career made me appear on TV. And not just any station, but a big station in Africa, e.tv.” “I’d never acted before and this was my first time. At one point, I tried football, but this failed hence why I decided to venture into fitness,” said Ngamla. The de facto artiste said he settled well at Rhythm City as he managed to rub shoulders with his childhood icons, the likes of Mduduzi Mabaso who plays Suffocate and Kabelo Moalusi as Pastor Makoro. “It was a great experience having to meet some of the people I used to look up to and getting motivation and tips from them. I settled well,” he said. Sadly for the up-and-coming actor, his acting stint may just be short-lived as Rhythm City is one of the shows that were canned. “The show was canned at a time I was hoping to kick-start my acting journey with Rhythm City. I had signed a one-year contract with them, but since the soapie has been canned, I’m still waiting to hear about the way forward. “But then, we soldier on and look for more opportunities,” a hopeful Ngamla said. Turning to his upbringing, he said he was fortunate as his family was supportive. “My family has always supported my dreams. I was raised by my granny as my mum passed away. “She’s played the role of a mum well and supported my dreams using her pension money,” said the grateful fitness trainer. On how he is surviving this Covid-19 period, Ngamla said the Fitpreneur business is keeping him afloat as he is operating it through house calls and community boot camps. — @mthabisi_mthire