The Chronicle TAKING a commanding lead against a less fancied opponent after an effortless run deep into the Australian Open, a sudden turnaround and an ultimate shock defeat to see the world number one and top seed crash out of her home tournament. You’d be forgiven for thinking you’d just accidentally clicked on the match report from Ash Barty’s surprise semi-final defeat to Sofia Kenin from 2020, but in truth there was very little different from the performance she put in on that Thursday afternoon and the one she delivered on this Wednesday one. There seems to be a mental barrier in Melbourne that she just can’t break through as the cool, calm and collected Ash Barty we’ve seen all tournament, all year in fact, was rocked so brutally by the smallest change. When 25th seed Karolina Muchova left the court for a medical timeout a set and a break down after complaining of feeling dizzy and needing a break from the Melbourne heat, Barty’s seat suddenly became uncomfortable, urging her to prowl around the baseline for five minutes instead. Was it nervous energy that needed to be released, or did the delay in her metronomic winning of points and games up until that point allow doubts and memories of the year before to creep in? Muchova came back a different animal and it was Barty who was left looking like the one who was feeling dizzy and in desperate need to get out of the Melbourne sun to collect her thoughts and refocus her intentions. Before the break, Barty was ahead on every statistic, winning more than double the points her opponent did from different distance from the net she took a shot from. After the timeout, she was behind on all of these. She couldn’t even react to Muchova’s second serve, with the Czech winning a remarkable 76 percent of the points in the second and third sets. Barty took three of her six break points before the timeout and none of her seven in the following two. But she wasn’t granted that reprieve as Muchova ruthlessly took advantage of the Aussie’s sudden insecurity to claim two breaks in the second set and another two to bookend the third set and send shockwaves around Australia. World number 27 Muchova was the highest-ranked player Barty had faced or was due to face until the final of this tournament in a draw that couldn’t have opened up more favourably for her. Waiting ahead of her was supposed to be either 22nd seed Jennifer Brady or unseeded Jessica Pegula. Put simply, Barty will never have an easier route to a Grand Slam final than the one Melbourne presented to her.
Perhaps that’s why it happened. It didn’t even have a big-match feel to it beforehand with the unusual 11am scheduled start time a far cry from a three-set epic under the lights going deep into the night. Everyone was already looking forward to the final – how many Australians would the Victorian government allow to be squeezed into the Rod Laver Arena? Would she face Naomi Osaka or Serena Williams? It was all too similar to what happened last year. Kenin, then ranked world number 15, defied not only her ranking and the pre-written narrative but also the searing heat of which Barty is more accustomed to in a straight-sets smash and grab. Then too, Barty found herself with a plethora of opportunities to stick to the script, spurning break point after break point in the set before finding herself unable to convert either of the two she earned in the first-set tie break or the other two she had while serving at 5-4 up in the second set. She went on to lose three consecutive games and leave all those in attendance at Rod Laver and the thousands more cheering on at home utterly shellshocked. Winning a home Grand Slam in the singles isn’t easy, that’s why Australia has gone so long without one. France is currently 21 years without one (and only has one the entire Open history), while Great Britain ended its 36-year wait in 2013. And Barty could learn from that one in particular, and the repeated disappointment Andy Murray suffered, when he broke down in tears and emotionally apologised to the crowd after finally making the final and losing, He too was already a Grand Slam winner and he channelled that pain and disappointment to spur him on and win twice at Wimbledon in the following three years. How Barty reacts to this latest setback will determine how much longer Australia must wait to celebrate its own champion again. – Fox Sports