The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
All is in place for the second edition of the Empire 263 Music and Arts Awards in conjunction with the Miss Valentines 2021 which will be held virtually on February 13. The awards organised by Empire 263 Entertainment and Model Agency have 25 categories being contested for this year under the theme “Innovative business practices in arts industry in response to dynamic global change.” For Miss Valentine, 23 contestants from across the country will vie for the five top spots. The Empire 263 Music and Arts awards recognises entertainers, sports persons and business partners that would have worked hard throughout the year. In the awards, Matabeleland region has its fair share of nominees that include Asaph in the Best Male category, Germany based rapper Awa Khiwe in the Best female category, Sandra Ndebele in the People’s choice category, Ellaine “Cocoa” Ncube in the Best Model category, Marvelous Nakamba in Best Sports Persons category and Thaluso Da Poet in the Best Newcomer category all the way from rural Mawane in Gwanda. Other notable nominees are Mitchelle Sikhosana, Ashley Ncube, Onesimo Ngcotsha, Khama Billiat, Blaqs, Herman, Jay Master, Nutty O, Ammara Brown and Tamy Moyo. Founder of Empire 263 Entertainment and Model Agency, Rangarirai Joseph Joey Mangono popularly known as DJ Joey Lion said the awards seek to appreciate artistes and personalities for standing firm in a trying time of the ongoing pandemic. “Nominations were through votes and winners for the awards will be determined by a panel of judges which also includes previous winners. Performance videos for the event are under production. “The beauty pageant will be also via online whereby model contestants will send their videos in a uniform manner using same songs. Judges will be previous model event winners led by the inaugural Queen Ellaine ‘Cocoa’ Ncube,”
said DJ Joey Lion. He said for other categories, voting is underway on their social media pages.
– @mthabisi_mthire