The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
Polling will open on Saturday for the public to select their best basketball player of the past decade on the Basketball Union of Zimbabwe (BUZ) Facebook page. BUZ is this month honouring the best players of the past decade in three categories, team of the decade, player of the decade and people’s choice player of the decade. Only the people’s choice award is open to a public vote on the BUZ Facebook page from Saturday. The other two categories will be voted for by club coaches that have coached a team up to a semi-final match in a BUZ national competition during the past decade. All senior national team head coaches that have worked during this period will also make up the voting panel. Each coach shall select at most 12 of his/ her most deserving men and women players. Their selections will be kept a secret until all lists have been submitted to the adjudicators. The top 12 players in both the men and women’s categories will automatically make up the team of the decade. Below are some players that have so far been shortlisted for the team of the year. Women
Lucia Marisamhuka, Fiona Mukukula, Patience Chinhoyi, Helena Nyagato, Regina Chisale, Margaret Magwaro, Sibongile Mkandla, Juliet Misihairambwi, Alice Misihairambwi, Fadzai Mabasa, Charity Mkukuti, Isobel Tengende and Alex Maseko, Melissa Majonga, Sharon Chamwarura, Geraldine Chibonda, Dorcus Marondera, Stambile Ngandini, Pretty Tinarwo, Charity Muchuchuti, Mellissa Majonga, Sheron Chamwarura, Yollanda Matayataya, Charity Muchuchuti, Charmaine Chirinda. Men
Tatenda Maturure, Vitalis Chikoko, Tawanda Chitsinde, Eric Banda, Taurai Chitsinde, Warren Tegama, Simba Munhomezi, Trevor (Mercenaries), Sithole (Mercenaries), Gideon Chikopa, Tatenda Tswatswa, Nathan Warikandwa, Tawanda Chitsinde, Moses Muyambo, Vitalis Chikoko, Trevor Sanyatwe, Evaresto Pasipamire, Eric Banda, Tatenda Maturure, Innocent Sithole, Simba Mungomezi, Tau Chitsinde, Walter Mabhena Tswatswa, Neville Chivhange