The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
TOP Zimbabwean golfer Scott Vincent will be heading to the Tokyo Olympic Games with one thing in his mind; to make the country proud by producing a top-class act. In an interview from his Colorado, United States of America base, the 29-year-old who is among the five athletes that will represent Zimbabwe in the Olympic Games, said he has been working hard to ensure that he does well. The other four athletes are swimmers Donata Katai and Peter Wetzlar, rower Peter Purcell-Gilpin and sprinter Ngoni Makusha. The Olympic Games will run from July 23 to August 4 in Tokyo, Japan, and Vincent is set to wrap up his preparations by participating at tournaments in the United States. After narrowly missing qualification for the last Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Vincent will face some of the world’s top golfers, who include four-time major champion Rory McIlroy from Ireland, the United States quartet of Bryson DeChambeau, Justin Thomas, Xander Schauffele and Collin Morikawa, as well as US Open Champion John Rahm of Spain. Vincent said top names in the 60 golfers that will compete in the Olympics don’t intimidate him. “The goal is obviously to be at the top. The reason I get up early to train every day is to do well. I’ll go to the Olympics hoping and expecting to perform very well,” said Vincent. “I’m very prepared. This week I’m going to play in a tournament. I’m working every day. I feel my swing and game are moving in the right direction. I have been doing mental coaching as well so that I go to the Olympics fully focused on golf. I still have two weeks to prepare.” Vincent expressed gratitude to the Zimbabwe Golf Association (ZGA) for supporting him in the run-up to the Olympics. “At the Olympics I’m representing more than myself and I’m grateful for that. The goal is to do my best and inspire up-and-coming golfers; maybe they will get to where I am,” Vincent said. ZGA president Mufaro Chivonivoni, who will be travelling to the Olympics as the golf team leader said: “We’ve done the best we can to make sure that administratively we provide everything that Vincent needed to qualify. As ZGA, we’re responsible for the equipment and uniforms for Scott so that his focus will be on the golf course.” — @ZililoR