The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
RADIO and television personality Tendai Garwe fondly known as Sokostina has urged up-and-coming artistes to take time to listen to local radio stations and get to know the various personalities before approaching them to play their music as it is a two-way process. She said it is shocking how some artistes do not listen to local radio and do not know which presenter is on which show yet they expect their music to be played. The former ZiFM Stereo personality who was adored by many for her Love Lounge show with DJ Eskay is now the Zimpapers Television Network (ZTN) features director. Sokostina said an unknown artiste called asking her to play their music on radio when in actual fact, she has been off radio for two years now. This triggered her to write on social media, the importance of artistes knowing personalities, the music genres they play and times and generally, the importance of listening to radio. “. . . the most disrespectful thing is that artistes don’t even know which DJ/radio personality plays what genre and when they’re even on air or which club they play, the days and time. “I remember one gospel artiste was asking if I could get them airplay. I asked them which station and which DJs they knew that had shows that play gospel. You insist on wanting to get played on radio and yet, you don’t even listen to the radio.” Sokostina said people need to know that radio DJs/personalities are also hustling just like artistes and need to be supported as well.
“Being a DJ/radio personality is a hustle too. We’re rated and stay on radio because you listen. We get endorsements by the number of people that listen to/follow us. If you want us to support your hustle, how about you support us by actually listening to the radio! “So, if you are an artiste, you MUST listen to the radio and know your DJs and personalities. If you have club songs, also go out of your way to know the club DJs.” In an interview yesterday, Sokostina said: “The post was not entirely about artistes as such, but it came after someone had asked me to play their music, a thing which showed me that they don’t follow our work. Such a tendency should stop,” said Sokostina. “The ultimate thing is just about respecting everyone’s hustle.” Sokostina also criticised people who unduly press journalists for coverage. “The same issue also applies to print journalists where someone would just call you and say ‘can I have my story written’. They don’t bother to follow you and see which beat you’re focused on as all they want is for you to write their stories.” The personality said appreciating each other will change even the power of unity in societies. “There are people I know who are grateful for the support, the likes of Jah Prayzah as they even follow radio DJs online. That on its own explains why he’s successful. So the whole issue is to ensure that a free-flowing two-way relationship is created,” said Sokostina. – @mthabisi_mthire