The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
LET’S not be under any illusion of whatever nature, Covid-19 is here and is causing unimaginable destruction to mankind. Decisions taken by the Government to mitigate against this virus are necessary to save lives because failure to take such measures can only lead to a catastrophe. On Tuesday last week, President Mnangagwa announced new lockdown which included a review of the curfew times from 10pm to 6am to 6.30pm and 6am.Business operating times are now between 8am and 3.30pm.There’s no doubt that Zimbabwe is a sport-loving nation and so when President Mnangagwa announced new lockdown measures returning the country to Level 4, we all held our breath and waited to see what the Sports and Recreation Commission sporting would do to align the sector with the new directive. Premier Soccer League teams were training as usual and even competed in the Chibuku Super Cup. As per Covid-19 health protocols, players and officials were first tested before resuming training and for the four teams that had midweek fixtures, second tests were also required while those meant to play last weekend did their tests on Friday. Teams that were supposed to play on Saturday went into camp on Friday while others like Black Rhinos and Cranborne Bullets, who use Sakubva Stadium in Mutare, had made travelling arrangements in addition to testing. The SRC remained silent and everybody thought the status quo would remain. Then on Friday when teams had paid and done their Covid-19 tests, boom, the SRC released a statement suspending all sports with immediate effect. The statement specifically mentioned football and the Chibuku Super Cup. “For the avoidance of doubt this suspension extends to the Zifa-PSL tournament for the Chibuku Super Cup and all sports previously classified as low risk. All national sports associations, clubs, gyms and related stakeholders should abide by this suspension without exception,” read part of the SRC statement. Fair and fine, SRC is domestic sport’s regulatory body, but the timing of that announcement was unfair. Why make that announcement at the 11th hour? Testing for Covid-19 is mandatory for all football clubs and it’s not free like vaccination. Had the SRC announced the suspension on Tuesday when national lockdown restrictions were adjusted, it would have saved clubs from wasting their meagre resources on testing. Clubs are reeling under serious financial challenges and such last minute announcements further worsen their situation. It was certainly unfair to clubs which had been religiously adhering to all laid down Covid-19 health protocols. The least SRC could have done is to effect the ban after the weekend matches just like it allowed the Charles Manyuchi fight to go ahead and for the Warriors to remain in camp. The majority of players in the Warriors’ camp are from the very same clubs that were affected by the ban which was only announced on Friday after teams had prepared for the weekend matches.