The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter THE National Athletics Association of Zimbabwe (Naaz) has established committees that will deal with unscrupulous coaches, who have been undermining the association’s authority. Naaz president Tendai Tagara said they had set up the coaches’ coordinators committee, officials coordinators committee and women’s committee to smoothen their operations. Coaches dreaming of being considered for provincial and national posts now have to affiliate with the coaches’ coordinators committee for consideration. The coaches’ committee will set its own rules and regulations to guide members. “Some coaches were getting sympathy from other quarters and disrespecting the national federation. It’s now more than your performance that counts. This is a game-changer as coaches must comply, affiliate and belong, so that if there is any misbehaviour, the coaches’ committee can deal with their member or report him or her to the national board for disciplinary measures to be taken,” said Tagara. “The coaches’ committee will drive the interests of coaches in Zimbabwe on all technical aspects of coaching, welfare, rules and regulations. No coach shall be appointed for national or international duty without affiliating and being registered by the coaches’ committee in their province and at national level,” he said. Harare province’s Collen Makaza heads the coaches’ committee and is deputised by Paralympian Elliott Mujaji from the Midlands, with Zibusiso Nyoni from Matabeleland South as secretary, while Duke Chigumira from Mashonaland East is the treasurer. The officials’ committee will be chaired by Juliet Mabula of Matabeleland South and deputised by Maxwell Murisa from Midlands, with Bulawayo’s Ngonidzashe Gasa and Shisha Sibanda from Matabeleland North as secretary and treasurer respectively. Florence Museza of Mashonaland Central leads the women’s committee that has Charity Ncube from Matabeleland South as deputy, Chipo Mutedzi (secretary) from Manicaland and treasurer Eusebia Ncube of Bulawayo. Tagara said the three technical committees will help to drive the association and will work under special mandates. — @ZililoR