The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Online Reporter President Mnangagwa has expressed shock at the death of more than 20 people following a horrific accident on Monday as he warned pirate vehicle operators that the wrath of the law will descend heavily on them. A Toyota Granvia and a Toyota Wish were involved in a head on collision at the 61KM peg along the Masvingo Zvishavane highway on Monday. Initially, 20 people died on the spot while three were rushed to hospital and were in a critical condition. Police confirmed on Tuesday that death toll rose to 22. In a statement, the President said: “On behalf of Government, I wish to express heartfelt condolences to the bereaved families and speedy recovery to all those who sustained injuries from this unfortunate incident. May the souls of the dearly departed rest in eternal peace,” said the President. “The death on Monday afternoon of 20 people in a horrific road accident which occurred at the 61km peg along the Masvingo-Zvishavane Highway came as a great shock to me. Our nation cannot continue to lose precious lives needlessly through road accidents, the majority of which are attributed to human error. As we grapple with road infrastructure rehabilitation to make them safer, let us exercise extreme caution on our roads. “Life is priceless and it is everyone’s responsibility to safeguard it. I urge motorists to avoid speeding and overloading in order to reduce undue accidents.” While warning pirate vehicle operators that the wrath of the law will descend heavily on them, President Mnangagwa urged Zimbabweans not to travel as the country is under enhanced level four lockdown. “In light of the surging Covid-19 infections and death in the current Third Wave which we seek to contain through the Enhanced Level 4 Lockdown measures, I appeal to the public to avoid unnecessary travel. Pirate commuter operators taking advantage of the current intercity travel ban are severely warned to stop the illegal practice as the full wrath of the law will descend heavily upon them,” said the President. Recently, President Mnangagwa placed the country on a strict level four lockdown, with new restrictions, which include custodial sentences for fake Covid-19 certificate holders, ban on intercity travel and mandatory quarantine for deportees and those from countries with Alpha and Delta Covid-19 variants. On Wednesday, three people died and 18 were injured after a Toyota Granvia burst a tyre and overturned about 70kms along the Bulawayo-Victoria Falls highway. The injured were taken to Mpilo Central Hospital in Bulawayo where they received treatment.-@bonganinkunzi