The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Author Brenda Mashudu Muleya has released her third novel titled Thorns of Life that is set to be used as a set book in South Africa.
Muleya, a teacher from Beitbridge who is based in the neighbouring country, said the novel seeks to address the ill happenings that young girls have become prone to. She said she penned the book whose copies she is selling physically so as to promote the culture of reading. “Thorns of Life is a sad story about how little girls are being abused, yet the matters are being swept under the carpet. This drives the girls to view the abuse as normal and in the process, their self-esteem is destroyed. “The book also encourages mothers to have relationships with their children. Children must be comfortable discussing burning issues with their parents,” said Muleya. “Currently, I’m exploring ways to sell the book online. At the moment, if one needs a copy, they contact me on my social media pages.” Muleya said Thorns of Life is set to be used as a set book for Literature at Makgodu Combined in Polokwane, Limpopo Province, South Africa where she teaches. She said the third novel becomes her very first to be written in English after her previous ones were written in Ndebele. “I’ve always loved writing since school. In 2017, I joined a certain social group for writers where writers would post their works. That triggered my own skills and I decided to give writing a try and it was a success. “I published my first novel, Soneni Mntanami under Sunshine Publishers Bulawayo in 2018 while my second novel titled Enhle Ngumakhothwa Ngunina was published in 2019 under Diamond Stars. My third novel was released a few weeks ago under Diamond Stars,” said Muleya. For the latest novel, Muleya said she decided to use English in order to broaden her fan base. She said she is now working on a compilation of poems. “The reason I opted for English was to increase my audience. I’m now working on compiling poems that I want to publish in three different languages, English, Ndebele and Venda,” she said. — @mthabisi_mthire.