The Chronicle CONNECTED Car says motorists should take up its tracking system to foil a recent surge in vehicle thefts and hijackings across the country. This was after the Zimbabwe Republic Police expressed concern over an increase in carjackings and urged the public to be wary of criminals targeting vehicles countrywide. The Criminal Investigation Department said it was currently investigating a number of cases where motorists have lost their vehicles to criminals in unrelated incidents across the country. The department advised motorists to install alarm systems, tracking devices and anti-hijack systems on their vehicles, for their safety and protection. Connected Car deploys reliable, GPS-based, vehicle tracking systems that have been proved to reduce crime and vehicle theft around the world. “Cars with tracking devices have more than an 80% chance of being recovered, compared to those without the devices, that have less than 10% chance of being recovered,” the company said. It added that it has supported the police to combat crime by providing real-time location for vehicles reported stolen, which assists in their speedy recovery. “The solution is serving over 7 000 Connected Vehicles and most of our customers have expressed satisfaction with the product,” the company said. In addition to facilitating the geolocation, recovery and repatriation of stolen vehicles, Connected Car also offers a scalable vehicle tracking and fleet management solution that allows both corporates and individuals to effectively and efficiently monitor and locate their vehicles, using digital platforms from anywhere in the world. “The solution, which now goes beyond GPS tracking, brings a really enhanced value proposition through a range of integrated technologies, which include on-board diagnostics, fuel monitoring, and multiple driver identification, further enriching the safety and security of the asset for both corporate and individual customers,” said the company. In line with the latest cost-cutting trends, the tracking system provides real-time vehicle monitoring, which enables customers to reduce operating costs associated with fleet management. It also minimises resource utilisation and processes associated with physical monitoring of vehicles in both localised and wide geographical spreads. “The digital solution provides timeous information that is critical for decision making to enable our customers to optimise the operational efficiency of vehicles and improve driver safety and fleet security,” added Connected Car. International best practices show that vehicle tracking helps businesses to keep an eye on all their vehicles and employees. This stems from the fact that when you have all your vehicles tracked, you will have their location and that of employees using them on a dashboard at all times. In addition, you can also know how long a vehicle stays in a given location. Therefore, when an employee takes a vehicle to an unauthorised location, the system immediately picks it up. Also, if a driver takes a route they should not use, the fleet owner will know. Connected Car said it is also assisting thousands of businesses to improve vehicle maintenance. “We plug our tracking devices into vehicle analytics to keep accurate records of vehicle usage. This can make it easy to follow maintenance schedules. Improved maintenance helps to prolong the life of the vehicles. It also helps prevent delays that may be caused when the vehicles break down,” the company said. In addition, a tracking system makes it easier for companies to reduce fuel consumption on their fleet. “A tracking system will cause the driver to operate a vehicle more responsibly,” the company said.