The Chronicle Harare Bureau
ZIMBABWE international Prince Dube faces a painful end to his first season in Tanzania as he is unlikely to take part in the final two rounds of games on health grounds. Dube, who was the firm favourite for the Golden Boot for the most part of the campaign, has since lost grip in the marathon after his main rival, John Bocco of Simba SC, surpassed his tally at the weekend. Tanzanian international Bocco scored his 15th goal when Simba SC beat Coastal Union 2-0 on Sunday to lift their 22nd Tanzanian Premiership title. Dube has 14 goals to his name and is also facing a serious challenge from another Simba SC player, Chris Mugalu, who scored the second against Coastal Union on Sunday to move to 13 goals. Mugalu put himself back in the picture when he grabbed a brace last week in the 2-0 win over KMC. Simba SC, who missed league games while participating in the Caf Champions League, have played more games recently as they have been battling to clear their backlog. This has allowed their players to close in on Dube, who at some point was four goals clear of the competition. All the teams have now played 32 games in the Tanzanian championship race which concludes this Sunday. Sadly, Dube may not have the opportunity to keep fighting for the Golden Boot in the last two rounds. The striker has already missed the previous two league games and a cup semi-final against Simba SC last month. Azam information officer Thabit Zakaria painted a grim picture on Dube’s prospects in an interview with IPP media of Tanzania. “Dube is suffering from chronic abdominal pain and has been given a two-week break so that his health can improve to serve Azam in the two matches, (it) will depend on the progress of his health,” said Zakaria. The 24-year-old started his campaign in Tanzania like a house on fire, scoring crucial goals and contributing assists, to help Azam take control of the race early on. However, the former Highlanders star has battled a series of injuries, which kept him out of action, for a considerable number of games. Dube last featured for Azam in the Sports Federation Cup quarter-final match against Rhino Rangers on May 26 but was withdrawn less than 10 minutes into the game because of a stomach ailment. He had returned from a long injury layoff and scored a magnificent half volley in the 2-0 win over Biashra United for his 14th goal of the season. Azam now have two games remaining and one of the interesting fixtures this week is the penultimate round clash with Simba SC at the Azam Complex tomorrow. Zakaria said Azam doctors have been working round the clock to try and have the Zimbabwean forward available for the clash where he would line up against his main rivals in the Golden Boot, Bocco and Mugalu. Another Simba SC forward, Meddie Kagere of Rwanda, is also not far off in the race with 11 goals of his own. Simba SC will be playing for pride after they won the title on Sunday following their victory over Coastal Union. They amassed an unassailable 79 points, with two matches to play. They have nine points more than second-placed Yanga. Azam, who are also home to Zimbabweans Bruce Kangwa and Never Tigere, are in third place with 64 points from 32 outings. The club is also interested in signing Warriors fringe midfielder, Last Jesi. The Ice Cream Makers experienced a dip in form during the season and are pushing for a strong finish. The side has often struggled when Dube was out. Apart from his 14 goals, Dube has also provided four assists and an additional three goals in the Federation Cup competition. He was voted Player of the Month twice during the season, despite missing a significant part because of recurring injuries. Azam will wrap up their campaign at Ruvu Shooting this coming Sunday.