The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Reporter
Organisers of the Zimbabwe Music Awards (Zima) have set the date for next year’s awards showcase and they say the awards ceremony will be a hybrid event. The 2022 Zimas will be on 19 February and will run under the theme, “Rhythm, Roots and Cultural Diversity”. Zima spokesperson Benjamin Nyandoro said: “The global pandemic Covid-19 is here to stay, so is our music. Zima 2022 aptly themed ‘Rhythm, Roots and Cultural Diversity’ will bring together masters, creators, performers and supporters to another celebration that recognises, unites and awards Zimbabwean music talent. “This edition seeks to unite Zimbabwe’s diverse musical roots, rhythm and culture under one strong voice and sound.” He said the Zimas seek to recognise and award deserving musicians in a fair and transparent manner that will bring all stakeholders to resource the process in their unique and diverse skill sets. Nyandoro added that new categories have been added. “For this edition, we’ve added new innovative categories to embrace the diverse music culture of Zimbabwe and the obtaining context. The glamorous Zimbabwe Music Awards will be a beautifully disruptive hybrid of a virtual and physical event scheduled for Saturday, 19 February 2022,” he said. Nyandoro said they are inviting companies and individuals to partner them in making the forthcoming edition a memorable one. “We take this opportunity to invite our friends to partner us in order to make this event a memorable one. In the past, the invaluable and unwavering support from corporate giants made us achieve unimaginable heights,” said Nyandoro. Among Zimas’ achievement was building a house for one of Zimbabwe’s celebrated music icons, the late Comrade Chinx in Sentosa, Harare in 2019. Retro awards whose mission was to award outstanding musicians that stood out before the establishment of Zima were also introduced. “In 2020, we established the Zima head office in Harare, repositioning Zima from an event into an institution. Zima hosted a music awards recognition and celebration event at The Country Club in Highlands Harare, rebranding itself as a premium event hosting high profile notable guests. “In 2021, Zima commissioned an external adjudication steering committee comprising of 12 qualified persons to oversee and develop the Zima Rule Book. Zima also hosted a successful virtual awards event that was broadcast on the national television and various streaming platforms that exposed the event to more than five million viewers,” Nyandoro said. This year, the Zima team donated groceries and renovated the house of the Zima 2021 Lifetime Achievers, the Cool Crooners in Bulawayo. — @bonganinkunzi.