The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Senior Health Reporter
THIRTY-NINE Mpilo Central Hospital doctors who lost all their property when fire gutted their residence in May got a shot in the arm yesterday after receiving a donation of beds, refrigerators and stethoscopes. The donation was courtesy of IAM4 BYO in partnership with the Women in Leadership Development Trust, Ladies of Zimbabwe in Australia, Evangelical Fellows Zimbabwe, Association of Health Funders of Zimbabwe and Simbisa Brands. The doctors got 33 stethoscopes, 24 beds, 44 refrigerators and 44 irons. The donation is valued at more than US$25 000 and Bulawayo acting provincial medical director Dr Welcome Mlilo expressed gratitude to the organisations. “The response has gone beyond Bulawayo and Zimbabwe as we have had people coming from all over to help our doctors. We are grateful to our people and generous organisations, their support has been nothing but amazing,” said Dr Mlilo. Ms Jana Ncube from IAM4 BYO said all health care workers had been bravely fighting Covid-19 hence it was important for organisation to rally behind them and ensure they have basics. She said the Bulawayo community had also chipped in and helped donate clothes, food and toiletries for the doctors. “Our community response started with WILD as one of the organisation that first reacted in the morning on the 27th of May. By the end of the day the doctors had basics like toothbrushes as we all know they only escaped with their lives,” said Ms Ncube. “We are grateful to the organisations which have provided most of the affected health care workers’ needs.” On behalf of the doctors, Dr Misheck Ruwende said he could not believe that finally they have received most of the expensive property lost. “We greatly appreciate all the partners who have come on board so far to assist us, be it Government or private or individuals, everyone has gone beyond our expectations. “We used to think that no one would be able to help us replace household property like beds and refrigerators but here we are today, we are grateful to these organisations,” said Dr Ruwende. — @thamamoe