The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Gospel musician-cum-actress Chelsea Mguni who is riding high with her recent Shoko Renyu release, is not letting the ongoing lockdown stifle her arts career. The recent track that was featured on Zimpraise’s Hymns Night 4 was sung in Ndebele, Shona and English making it more appealing. It was an instant hit-topping charts on radio. Mguni’s acting career is also on the right track as she has introduced comedy skits dubbed Bhiyenka where she is unpacking the diaries of a single mother who solely raises her children. She is faced with trials and tribulations, a storyline most can relate to. Through her publicity manager Nokukhanya Mhlanga, Mguni said she is not letting the pandemic affect her growth as she is targeting penetrating the international market. “My acting career dates back to 2018 when I was Nceku’s partner in crime, producing comedy skits. As a way of keeping people entertained during the lockdown, I’m now tackling mother and child relationships largely focused on the African families through comedy skits,” said Mguni. Watching the skits, Mguni’s talent becomes evident. It is also clear that the artiste who is now based in Harare is following in the footsteps of social media comedian and actress Madam Boss. The comedy series which premièred over a month ago is being shown weekly. It has a cast that includes Nokuthula Sithole aka Noxy Divine Diva who plays Sthembile while the Snikiwe character is being played by Nakiso Majecha. The role of the male child is being played by Ngonidzashe Shamudzarira. The production team comprises Victor Stot and Zimazile Bango. During the lockdown period, Mguni’s music career has been soaring as she has been participating in several online concerts that include performing with the renowned Thembalami under his sessions “Thembalami lockdown sessions” and the Fusion Media Group Lockdown sessions. “Embracing the digital space is the way to go for us as artistes in such a time. I’m honoured to have been the first guest on the Senditoo Soul Sunday’s session that premièred last Sunday and aired on their Facebook page. I was also part of the Nyaradzo birthday celebrations and have also been featured on Zimpraise’s latest project,” said Mguni. Twenty-six-year-old Mguni who was born in Bulawayo started singing at a tender age and recorded her first album in 2018 titled The Praise Offering. She was introduced to audiences seven years ago during the Sithi Uyingcwele Gospel Concert at the Large City Hall with her energetic performance that impressed many. The concert was to introduce people to Vocal Ex, a group that she was part of. The gospel choir was founded by three influential figures in gospel circles, Mkhululi Bhebhe of South African group Joyous Celebration, 2008 Idols East Africa winner Eric Moyo and Thembelani Mdlaziba. Mguni later went solo and last year, former South African Joyous Celebration choir member, Ayanda Shange roped her in for a single, Tinoti Mwari Variko that was part of Shange’s The Altar of Praise Vol 1. The album also featured veteran gospel musician Sipho Makhabane and Shange’s wife Koketso Shange. Before that, Mguni collaborated with Tembalami, Pastor G, Sulumani Chimbetu, Selmor Mtukudzi, McDee and Trevor Dongo on a song titled Blessing Zim. — @mthabisi_mthire.