The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
SOUTH Africa-based hip-hop musician Mlue Jay (real name Mlungisi Dombo Moyo) has finally released his debut album titled Donatella. The album is a dedication to his first born child who the album is named after. The 18-track album has songs — Donatella (Intro), Kush and Bottles featuring Asaph, Try featuring Everything’s Ghost, Do Better, I Did It, No Favours featuring Everything’s Ghost, 247 featuring Dakid Verse, Cry featuring Dopey, Wakadhakwa featuring Brythreesixty and Thula featuring the late Cal Vin. Other tracks are Safe featuring Sykotek and Vic Jita, Shooter, 5 minutes, Ifa So featuring Gunxdapharoah, Ride For You, What You Like, Money On My Name featuring NguDoni, and No Validation which is a freestyle track. Speaking from South Africa, Mlue Jay, who hails from Magwegwe West in Bulawayo, said he dedicated the album to his two-year-old daughter as she means a lot to him. He said she is the one who motivated him to dedicate himself more to his music. “Donatella, my two-year-old is a gift from God that I was given through my wife Dyllia Banda and I thank her for that. To celebrate her, I went all out with this album as I had the drive. My daughter is the reason I do what I do on a daily basis, from work to music. “Since she was born, my life changed completely. I suddenly had a reason for living and working hard. My daughter also loves the music I do and I even featured her on the album,” said Mlue Jay. Interestingly, Mlue Jay said when his daughter was born, he was working on the album and following the news of her birth he went the extra mile and experimented with new sounds and skills. “All I wanted to do was to honour my daughter with my first album,” said the proud father. True to his word, these past two years have seen Mlue Jay’s music career change for the better as he last year received his first Zim Hip Hop award after having been nominated for three editions with no success. Mlue Jay is heavily influenced by the likes of Lil Wayne and Drake and started doing music in 2008 as a sound engineer and music producer. Since then, he has managed to host shows in the neighbouring country that include They Need Me and A Night In Newtown. He has shared the stage with big names such as Jeys Marabini, Black Coffee, Kwesta, Sjava and Emtee. — @mthabisi_mthire