The Chronicle He who is faithful flourishes, but he who is unfaithful perishes. People that fall into the latter are usually the impatient lot that is always looking for a get-rich-quick scheme as I mentioned in yesterday’s teaching. Be true to yourself and God in everything you do. As an entrepreneur, do not be moved by other business people that are making money quickly. You may not know how they got there. Some may rise in a matter of months and you may feel you are tailing them. It is better to take a long route that ensures a permanent blessing than a short one that yields temporary results. Take one step at a time. Do not desire to have riches quickly in dishonest ways for great haste makes great waste. There is nothing wrong with having small beginnings.
Zechariah 4:10 For who hath despised the day of small things? for they shall rejoice, and shall see the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel [with] those seven; they [are] the eyes of the LORD, which run to and fro through the whole earth.(KJV)
Humans also have scales. The scale is your heart and your motives. God weighs your heart and motives. Some people think they can trick God when they pray and say ‘’Lord, if you bless me with money I will bring it to your house,” making false promises in prayer. Never think God can be fooled. He does not grant such prayers, but He weighs your heart and motives. God is the one who created you. He is omniscient and knows your very thoughts and intentions. The church needs to come to an understanding and to know who God is. Knowing God is not in the number of years you have been in the house of God, but it is a dawning; an encounter you have with God. Those who know God are strong and will do great and mighty exploits. They can invest in the things of God because they have a deeper understanding of who God is. If you want to live long, be faithful. Even if you have an incurable disease, be faithful so that your days are lengthened. Remain stable and do not worship other gods except for the ONE ALMIGHTY GOD. Be stable. God bless!
eaglelifeassembly@yahoo.com