The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
A new television talk show from Victoria Falls #TxJunction with SharksNova is set to premiere on ZBCtv on Monday and will be the first of its kind from the tourism capital. Radio personality and fashion artist Thanduxolo Nesbit Ndlovu, popularly known as SharksNova is the brains behind the show that will have 13 episodes. It will be shown on Mondays at 6pm with experts in various spheres set to feature as guests. After showing on ZBCtv, the episodes will be uploaded on YouTube each week. SharksNova, a presenter at Breeze FM in Victoria Falls will be the host of the show that seeks to inform, educate and entertain viewers while also exposing the talent in Victoria Falls. He said it took him four years to come up with the production because of the challenges he faced in securing funds to shoot the production. The Covid-19 outbreak did not do him any good as well. “I started working on the show in 2017 but have been struggling to get funding to shoot the production. In June last year, I decided to go ahead with the production with or without funds and identified people I could work with. We then established Black Brother Film Production,” SharksNova said. Detailing the show, he said: “The #TxJunction is a visual talk show with a game towards the end where we play Never have I ever. We then close off with a music video of the week. This show seeks to bring out the best of the famous celebrities and influential people in our community. “They’ll share their experiences and expertise in various facets of life as we focus on conversations on financial, life coaching, culture, entertainment and their personal lives,” said SharksNova. He said the talk show is suitable for viewing by the whole family. The production team comprises Kudakwashe Mataga who is the production manager, James Salim and Terry Kuda Makota (camera and cinematography), South Africa-based Tholakele Ndlovu and Thamsanqa (scriptwriting), DJ Cleazer (graphic designer) and Leopatra Ranaeea (make-up artist). SharksNova who is also a fashion artist has been in the entertainment industry for a decade. He said he is taking this show seriously as it is his contribution to the industry. “I’ve made a conviction to contribute to the entertainment industry. We have another production called Umndeni that’s coming up and as such there are exciting times are ahead,” he said. — @ncubeleon.