The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
IT will be a defining moment for Bulawayo City FC and Bulawayo Chiefs when Group B matches in the Chibuku Super Cup resume at the weekend, with defeat for either side marking the end of their tournament. To ensure that they keep their hopes of progressing to the next stage of the tournament alive, City and Chiefs have to win their respective games against Chicken Inn and Highlanders, who are both on seven points from three outings. Chicken Inn, who top the table due to a superior goal difference, clash with City at Barbourfields Stadium on Saturday, with Highlanders and Chiefs locking horns at the same venue 24 hours later. The Gamecocks beat City 2-0 in the first leg and Bosso won 1-0 against Chiefs. Wins for Chicken Inn and Highlanders will take their points tally to 10, eliminating both City and Chiefs. Should they play to draws, City and Chiefs will have to win their remaining matches and hope that either Chicken Inn or Bosso falter.
City coach Philani “Beefy” Ncube said they’re ready for the games. “Our preparations are coming good. We’ve been working on tactical and psychological awareness. I think come Saturday, we will be ready for duty,” said Ncube. Chiefs coach Thulani Sibanda will have to do without the trusted pair of defender Marlvin Mkolo and striker Farau Matare, who are part of the Warriors’ squad preparing for the Cosafa Cup. “To be honest, those two (Matare and Mkolo) give us positive options and to say we won’t miss them would be lying. However, we’re working hard to make sure that we’re in the best shape against Highlanders. The players have been working hard and seem geared up for duty,” said Sibanda. With veteran forward Kundishora Chakanyuka still out injured, Chiefs will bank on Billy Veremu to lead their attack. They also have former Zim Leopards attacking midfielder Correy Black, who can also play as a striker. In defence, 17-year-old Makokoba-bred right-back Thomas Mudzengere might be thrown into the fray to fill Mkolo’s slot.
Fixtures Saturday: Triangle United v Ngezi Platinum Stars (Mandava), Black Rhinos v Tenax (Sakubva), Chicken Inn v Bulawayo City (Barbourfields), Harare City v Caps United (National Sports Stadium) Sunday: FC Platinum v Whawha (Mandava), Highlanders v Bulawayo Chiefs (Barbourfields), Cranborne Bullets v Manica Diamonds (Sakubva), Herentals v ZPC Kariba (National Sports Stadium), Dynamos v Yadah (National Sports Stadium)