The Chronicle Leonard Ncube , Victoria Falls Reporter
THE Victoria Falls City Council says it needs about $6 million per month to pump and distribute water to consumers. Speaking during a virtual all-stakeholder meeting where the local authority agreed to reduce its 2021 budget by 50 percent across board with the exception of water and refuse collection charges, the city’s treasurer Mr Nevile Ndlovu said input costs for water management were so high that the council cannot give in to residents’ demand for reduction of water rates. The local authority recently took over raw water management rights from the Zimbabwe National Water Authority (Zinwa), a development that prompted residents to say water should then be cheaper since there is no third party. The local authority had proposed a nearly $1,3 billion budget for 2021 drawing the ire of residents who said their views were not captured hence the consultation process was flawed. Residents said they were shocked in January this year when many received water bills ranging between $3 000 and $9  000 per month. The residents lobbied for reduction of rates as they petitioned Local Government and Public Works Minister July Moyo to force for a reduction of the budget. Minister Moyo recently ordered the council to consult residents on the budget, saying Government was not going to prescribe a remedy to the local authority. A virtual meeting was held yesterday where the council agreed to reduce all other charges by 50 percent except for water and refuse collection fees. Residents were still insisting on council to reduce water and refuse rates by a similar margin. “Water has so many components and at current prices we need about $2 million per month just at the pump and our bill is about $6 million per month from current prices for electricity only and paying Zinwa. “We buy water purification chemicals from Bulawayo or Harare and prices continue to increase. So it becomes very difficult to reduce water charges. If we put rates that stakeholders want, we will not be able to provide services,” said Mr Ndlovu. He said a proposal made by residents to cross-subsidise by reducing water charges and cover the expenses using collections from other services was not feasible because already the council will be running on a deficit, as the reduction of budget does not mean reduced expenses. Mr Ndlovu said water cannot be reduced because costs associated with electricity, fuel and other inputs continue to rise.
He said contrary to residents’ belief that taking over raw water management would mean water will be cheaper in the city, there were numerous costs associated with the process. “Water has a direct continuous cost. Now that we have taken over water from Zinwa, what has emerged is more costs as we now need manpower to man the plant. We need to pay Zinwa for raw water and electricity and with that, it was inevitable that water goes up,” he said. Victoria Falls mayor Councillor Somveli Dlamini said the council had to settle for a compromised position to make sure the local authority continues to render services while at the same time considering the plight of residents. “After taking into consideration submissions, council has taken a decision to slash rates by 50 percent across board except for water and refuse. It should be noted that budget can’t be approved if it doesn’t show that the council will be sustainable. The local authority is fully committed to serve the community of Victoria Falls and as a tourist destination we need to be equal to other destinations in terms of quality service,” he said. Hospitality Association of Zimbabwe (HAZ) Matabeleland North chapter chair Mr Anald Musonza said businesses and residents were already burdened by unpaid bills dating back to January when the council inflated rates. Victoria Falls Combined Resident Association chairman Mr Kelvin Moyo implored the local authority to be sensitive to the plight of residents who he said were not in the habit of disapproving council budgets but were this time around hamstrung because of Covid-19 which grounded tourism, the town’s economic mainstay. — @ncubeleon