The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter THE Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC) says the safe return of football can only be guaranteed if the Premier Soccer League resorts to a bio-bubble format, which effectively pours cold water on the possibility of early resumption. The SRC released shocking Covid-19 statistics in the PSL, which show a 600 percent increase of positive cases between the first phase of the tournament, which lasted two and a half months, and the second phase, which lasted two weeks. The first-half of the Chibuku Super Cup tournament, covering the period April to mid-June 2021, saw 9 500 tests being done, with four retaining positive results, representing a positive infection rate of 0.042 percent. The second phase, which commenced in mid-June until the current suspension in the week ending Friday July 2, 2021, a total of 24 Covid-19 positive cases were detected from 1 100 tests, said the SRC. The bio-bubble was initially proposed by the PSL, but the plans were shelved due to financial incapacity and resorted to the current format of mandatory testing before training and every game. In its position paper on the suspension of sporting activities and events, the SRC said although games were being played in a controlled environment with pre-match testing of players, fumigation of stadia and zoning of playing areas, it was still not sufficient to circumvent the continued spread of the virus under the current third wave since players and officials were commuting from home. “It is clear that protocols designed to mitigate the lack of a bio-secure bubble for players and officials (the costs were said to be prohibitive) were not being effectively adhered to or monitored by the affected individuals and clubs resulting in the rising rate of infections. This posed a significant risk of infection from their respective communities (which were not a controlled environment) in circumstances where the rate of local transmission has significantly increased as evidenced by the numbers released by the Ministry of Health and Child Care,” said the SRC. “Without placing footballers and officials in a bio-secure bubble, the immediate return of Premier League football in the present environment is simply not possible. A positive player risks infecting teammates, close family members and subsequently, the community. It is clear that any return to topflight football at this stage can only happen if a full bio-secure bubble environment is implemented where players and officials reside in controlled environments for the duration of the tournament. This is the position implemented by cricket and rugby, among other protocols, leading to the various exceptions granted to them in the present environment.” It said while it was undeniable that everyone desires a quick return to sport, such a move must be handled in a responsible manner where objectivity is informed by science, WHO protocols, Government policies and the law, as opposed to calculated emotion. “The SRC encourages all stakeholders, especially national sports associations, to continue to make their respective, and proactive, representations to the SRC regarding their proposals for enhanced protocols in their respective fields for consideration towards the resumption of their sports code. Most obviously the SRC is therefore encouraging all athletes and sectorial stakeholders to undergo vaccination. As more sections of the population embrace vaccination and achieve herd immunity, the rate of infections could be contained. This containment will facilitate the current efforts by the SRC and relevant stakeholders towards the full safe resumption of sport, which may eventually involve spectators on a limited scale. “SRC together with key stakeholders, including national sport associations, is closely monitoring the situation on the ground in order to proffer a sustainable solution to Government on the safe resumption of sport. To this end, weekly reviews are being conducted in consultation with the Ministry of Youth, Sports, Arts and Recreation and the Ministry of Health and Child Care.” The SRC statement came a day after Covid-19 claimed its first victim in football, Triangle United board member Tarisai Mudambanuki.