The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
A second Chibuku Super Cup match pitting Triangle United and Ngezi Platinum Stats has been postponed after Triangle players and officials tested positive for Covid-19, the Premier Soccer League said. The match was set for Mandava Stadium in Zvishavane tomorrow. Early this week, the PSL iced the ZPC Kariba and Harare City encounter, which was slated for Wednesday at the National Sports Stadium after the electricity men’s players and officials also tested positive for the virus. “This serves to advise that the Chibuku Super Cup match between Triangle United and Ngezi Platinum Stars scheduled to be played on Saturday 3 July 2021 has been postponed. This is to allow Triangle United players and officials, who have tested positive for Covid-19 to self-isolate in line with the Covid-19 protocols. “Clubs are reminded to follow the Covid-19 protocols and guidelines to contain the spread of the virus. The postponed fixture will be rearranged in due course,” read a statement by PSL communications and media liaison officer Kudzai Bare. Last week the PSL announced that if a team records seven or more positive cases, its match would be postponed immediately to allow the affected individuals to self isolate in line with the Covid-19 protocols. The Zifa and Premier Soccer League (PSL) head of medical committee Edward Chagonda, meanwhile, said in line with international trends, clubs now risk forfeiting points if seven or more of their players test positive for Covid-19. Meanwhile, Chibuku Super Cup matches will resume as scheduled this weekend, but under new kick-off times, the Sports and Recreation Commission (SRC) and Zifa have announced. Chibuku Super Cup games had two kick-off times, 1pm and 3pm, but following a Tuesday order by President Mnangagwa that commerce and business hours be adjusted to between 8am and 3.30pm, while curfew times were also reviewed from 10pm to start at 6.30pm to 6am, the PSL would have found itself on the wrong side of the law for allowing games to start when business are expected to close shop. With Chibuku Super Cup matches ending at 5pm and players and coaches only leaving the stadia about 45 minutes later after media commitments, many would have been caught on the wrong side of the restrictions. Wednesday’s match between Yadah and Caps United at the National Sports Stadium kicked off at 3pm to mark the return of the Chibuku Super Cup. Zifa communications and competitions manager Xolisani Gwesela said with immediate effect, the PSL must adjust its kick-off times in compliance with Government’s lockdown regulations. “In consultation with the PSL, they will now adjust their kick-off times in line with the Government’s lockdown regulations and those changes are with immediate effect,” said Gwesela. Chibuku Super Cup fixtures
Saturday: Triangle United v Ngezi Platinum Stars (Mandava), Black Rhinos v Tenax (Sakubva), Chicken Inn v Bulawayo City (Barbourfields), Harare City v Caps United (National Sports Stadium)
Sunday: FC Platinum v Whawha (Mandava), Highlanders v Bulawayo Chiefs (Barbourfields),
Cranborne Bullets v Manica Diamonds (Sakubva), Herentals v ZPC Kariba (National Sports Stadium), Dynamos v Yadah (National Sports Stadium)