The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
SOUTH AFRICA is known for well-maintained world-class sports facilities, but the state of the playing pitch at Isaac Wolfson Stadium in KwaZakele, just outside Gqeberha in the country’s Eastern Cape province is atrocious. Isaac Wolfson Stadium is one of the two venues being used for the 2021 edition of the senior men’s Cosafa Cup that is currently underway in South Africa. Nelson Mandela Bay Stadium, which hosted 2010 Fifa World Cup matches, is the other facility being used for the tournament. The stadium is well-maintained, with the pitch condition in a fine state, which can’t be said about Isaac Wolfson Stadium. From the television images, the Isaac Wilson pitch where Zimbabwe and Mozambique played to a 0-0 draw on Wednesday, before Namibia beat Senegal 2-1, the pitch condition is deplorable, with lots of patches and can’t pass an inspection to even host local DStv Premier Soccer League games. Caf now demands that pitches be level, well-manicured with clear markings in white. However, the opposite is true of Isaac Wolfson Stadium, as no proper tactical football can be executed on its pitch, as it’s all bumpy, making it hard to play the ball on the ground. In a serious international tournament, it can’t even pass for a training ground, but Cosafa selected it as a venue for its premier competition. After their goalless draw against Zimbabwe, Mozambican coach Horacio Goncalves condemned the playing pitch, saying it affected their style of play. “The game was very well technically and tactically. The field is not good for our football because we’re a technical team and it’s difficult to play the way we want,” a frustrated Goncalves said. The Portuguese might be one of many gaffers that are likely to blame the Isaac Wolfson pitch should they perform dismally in the Cosafa Cup. Goncalves, who was appointed head coach two months ago, is under pressure to deliver after being tasked with guiding Mozambique to the 2022 African Nations Championship and the 2023 Total Africa Cup of Nations. He has to produce a better showing than in their lifeless game against Zimbabwe at the Wolfson Stadium that was dominated by constant awkward bounces as the pitch’s unevenness influenced play. Perhaps in acknowledgement of the unsuitability of the stadium to host a tournament of such calibre, the Cosafa Cup organisers have ensured that all teams at least play their group matches at the facility. — @ZililoR