The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
Music promoter and one of the founding members of Radio Bukalanga Gerald Mantseye Ncube has died. Ncube from Gwambe Village, Bulilima district in Matabeleland South province succumbed to Covid-19 in South Africa last Sunday. The late Ncube’s LMG Entertainment company promoted a number of musicians including Ndux Junior, Mba Tapela, Zhwane Diamond, Mokis Connection, Gwambe Stars and Freddy Gwala among many others. “He was very passionate about promoting the arts and wanted to see the growth of Kalanga music. He was one of the founders of Radio BuKalanga, an online radio station which was formed to try and support the arts in South Africa,” said a colleague, Difa Bango who started Radio BuKalanga with Ncube. Bango said Ncube spent most of his resources helping artistes for free due to his passion for promoting Kalanga arts. He said before his demise, they had started working on establishing a BuKalanga TV station as they wanted to use all mediums to help promote the arts. Madlela Skhobokhobo who worked with Ncube on a number of projects said he was devastated by his death. “Gerald was a very selfless person who wanted his people based in South Africa to be united and never forget where they came from. We used to host the Joshua Mqabuko Day in South Africa and he’d dig deep into his pockets to fund the event,” said Madlela. He said a number of artistes benefited from the late promoter’s benevolence. Another musician who worked with Ncube, Ndux Junior said he was at a loss for words because the late Ncube did a lot to support his career. “I worked with him from around 2007 and he promoted me a lot. There are very few promoters who genuinely want to see an artiste develop as most of them are greedy, but he was different. He was transparent, fair and polite,” said Ndux. He said the late would pay for his transport and provide accommodation for him in South Africa each time he went there on business. The late Ncube was also involved in developmental projects in Bulilima District. “Ncube was the brains behind Gwambe Clinic which is almost complete. He was the chairman for the South African chapter and mobilised all the people from the area to support the project. It’s unfortunate that he died before the project was complete. He will be missed dearly,” said Descent Lungwane Moyo who worked closely with Ncube. Moyo said Ncube recently opened a gym, the first of its kind in Plumtree town. He described Ncube as a local hero who did his best to uplift communities and never withheld his knowledge whenever it was needed. “He was one of the guys who were mobilising communities in Matabeleland provinces to join groups of 300 so that they contribute to buy a borehole rig to help solve the water challenges in rural areas. He was a development champion,” Moyo said. The late Ncube is expected to be buried in Gwambe Village tomorrow. — @themkhust.