The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Court Reporter GOVERNMENT has approved the proposed amendment to the Legal Practitioners Act to ensure a high standard of professional ethics, good governance, transparency and accountability. This follows the presentation of the proposal to the Cabinet by Justice, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Minister Ziyambi Ziyambi. The Legal Practitioners Act (Chapter 27:07) regulates the legal profession in Zimbabwe. The Act established the Law Society of Zimbabwe, (LSZ), a corporate body which was incorporated in terms of the Law Society of Zimbabwe (Private) Act. In her post Cabinet briefing on Tuesday, Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa said there are several provisions of the Act that have been identified that need to be amended to ensure a high standard of professional ethics, efficient and economical use of resources as well as transparency and accountability. In terms of some of the provisions, the Minister of Justice, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs will be able exercise his discretion to approve or disapprove external funding raised by the LSZ to ensure efficient and economical use of resources. “Cabinet considered and approved the Principles of the Proposed Amendment to the Legal Practitioners Act. The nation is informed that Section 52(o) of the Act will be amended by the insertion of a new section that authorises the Minister of Justice, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to exercise his discretion to approve ordisapprove external funding raised by the Law Society of Zimbabwe to ensure efficient and economical use of resources,” she said. “This will ensure good corporate governance principles as entrenched in the Constitution. Furthermore, Section 54(1)(b) is amended so that Ministerial appointments to the Law Society Council are increased fromtwo to four councillors in the national interest.” The LSZ is an association mandated with registering lawyers and regulating how lawyers and law firms operate in the country. It was formed in 1981 to replace the previous bar association. The membership of is drawn from all registered legal practitioners residing in Zimbabwe whether in private practice, in commerce or in civil service. @mashnets