The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
GOVERNMENT is investigating how an unroadworthy Toyota Wish that collided head-on with a Toyota Granvia leading to the death of 20 people on Monday was on the road. The Toyota Wish had twice been booked into a Vehicle Inspection Depot (VID) and deemed unroadworthy but still ended up on the road. The Granvia encroached onto the lane of the oncoming Toyota Wish, which was coming from Zvishavane, resulting in the head-on collision at the 61km peg along Masvingo-Mbalabala Road near Chitowa Business Centre, just after Mhandamabwe. In an interview after visiting accident survivor Ms Judith Shara, who is admitted to Gweru Provincial Hospital with multiple injuries which include a fractured bone in her left leg, the Minister of Transport and Infrastructure Development Felix Mhona said the Toyota Wish was unroadworthy. “We were shown two documents indicating that the Toyota Wish had been condemned twice by VID and so we wonder how it ended up on the road leading to the fatal accident. As Government we want to get to the bottom of this because unroadworthy vehicles shouldn’t be found on the roads,” he said. Minister Mhona said if it is established that police or VID officers corruptly released the vehicle, action would be taken against them.
He said President Mnangagwa was concerned about the surge in road carnage especially at a time when people should be staying at home in the spirit of fighting against the surge in Covid-19 infections. “Road accidents are a serious threat to the socio-economic fibre of the nation and I was sent by President Mnangagwa to see what is happening on the roads so that action is taken,” said Minister Mhona. ZRP spokesperson Assistant Commissioner Paul Nyathi who was accompanying the Minister said road safety is a collective responsibility which entails that all Zimbabweans have to play a part. “Also, when considering that the country is currently fighting the Covid-19 pandemic where certain health and security measures have been put in place including the banning of inter -city travel, people have to just comply and people have to just take heed of Government’s call and prioritise their health, their safety,” he said. Asst Comm Nyathi said the police are concerned about the continued traffic on the roads when the Government banned inter-city travel. He said they are concerned about what is happening on the roads and disregard for Covid-19 rules and regulations. “What we have seen here at Gweru Provincial Hospital is not pleasing. We have seen people seriously injured in road traffic accidents and it’s saddening. “And our position as police is clear, if there are police officers who are conniving with pirate taxis or conniving with mushikashika we will bring them to book. We want to appeal to members of the public to report so that we take action. But on the other hand, I want to challenge members of the public, this is your life, this is your safety, if we say, don’t board pirate taxis we mean it. If the Government says no intercity travel, then let’s stay home and be safe,” said Asst Comm Nyathi. He commended Minister Mhona and other stakeholders for fighting the surge in road carnage. “We also want the members of the public to listen and be safe. Where there is an element of corruption involving the police or anyone, we want to encourage members of the public to come forward so that we can nip this problem in the bud once and for all,” he said. There are 10 victims of road traffic accidents admitted to Gweru Provincial Hospital suffering different kinds of injuries, some of them life-threatening.