The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
MATSHOBANA-based Bambelela Arts Ensemble remains one of the theatre acts that have managed to maintain their quality regardless of financial challenges that have seen numerous arts groups go under. The outfit, that marked 29 years in the arts industry on June 20, sadly failed to hold festivities due to the Covid-19 pandemic that continues to derail the arts sector. Had it been any other time, people would have been treated to celebrations, but alas, it is what it is. Taking it back to the group’s formation, it all started as an idea that was mooted way back in 1992 when Adolf Phiri, Naison Dube, Liwena Mathe, and Allan Sithole sat and did a retrospection of the youth’s participation/role in community development. They realised that youths were not considered or involved in any stage of developmental processes hence the need to provide a platform where they could claim their space and actively participate in most issues and activities to do with development. The quadruple then shared their vision with other youngsters from one of the city’s oldest suburbs, Matshobana. A buy-in from most youths was earned and the clarion call saw youths embark on a journey that gave birth to Bambelela Theatre Production. The theatre production’s membership swelled with about 30 members signing up. The group was later changed to Bambelela Arts Ensemble on June 20, 1992, a name that still breathes life koNtuthu Ziyathunqa, the City of Kings and Queens. The transformation of the arts group was driven by a passion for the creative industry and community development that came about through Phiri (now late), Mathe (now in South Africa), Dube (now in Swaziland) and Witness Tavarwisa who is still around. Saturday Leisure caught up with the group which, like all others, has been greatly affected by the indefinite closure of the arts sector. The group’s director Tavarwisa said the group was slowly adjusting to the new normal where arts is now being showcased in the virtual space. “The journey of the group has been a learning curve and we’ve grown from just being an entertainers’ drama club to being a transformational tool of development. “We’ve also passed the test of time and claimed our space as an alternative source of media through our social commentary productions and community engagement activities. These are centred on identifying, presenting, and provoking appropriate mitigation measures to issues that affect the community and its development,” said Tavarwisa. However, Tavarwisa said as they are looking forward to celebrating their 30th anniversary next year. The group is now down to 10 members from the initial 30. Those who are still with the group are Khumbulani Mathe, Nomvelo Bhehane, Nyarai Chakwana-Ncube, Josphat Ndlovu, Bongelani Ncube, Leonard Phiri, Tawanda Mukoma, Silence “Mba” Moyo, Donecia Mathe and Tavarwisa. “Although there’s a few of us left, we still stand guided by the zeal of community development. Our vision is to ensure the arts are seen as a business that provides the best services and plays its appropriate role in upholding overall human rights and development. “We also seek to encourage people’s participation in socio-economic, political and cultural transformation through arts.” To date, Bambelela Arts Ensemble has produced more than two dozen high quality, action-packed theatre productions and numerous infomercial audio and video skits. Tavarwisa said they are in the process of getting their productions broadcast on radio and online platforms to keep their fans entertained. The ensemble has, over the years, performed at numerous events that include the Harare International Festival of the Arts, Ibumba Arts Festival and Intwasa Arts Festival koBulawayo. They have been awarded a number of National Arts Merit Awards. The ensemble, that won last year’s Geraldine Roche drama competition, is a member of the Zimbabwe Association of Community Theatre (ZACT). — @mthabisi_mthire