The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Online Reporter A 30-YEAR-OLD Gwanda woman is looking for her paternal family after stating that she is failing to succeed in life and prophets have advised her to locate her family as her ancestors were restless. Ms Rumbidzai Manyongore said her mother passed away while she was still young and she only knows that her family’s name is Manyongore and they are from Bikita. She said she grew up under the care of her maternal grandfather. “I have never met my family or my paternal family. I just know that they are from Bikita. From what I was told, my mother met my father in Zvishavane and she later came to back to Gwanda while I was still a baby. When my mother went back to Zvishavane my father was gone and she didn’t have his address. She tried to locate him but without luck and she died before she could introduce me to him. “I’m in desperate need to meet my family because things are not going well for me in life. I now have three children with different fathers because my relationships don’t last. I have tried working in South Africa but that also failed. I have consulted with a number of prophets and they have advised me to locate my family if I want things to work out for me. They said my family’s spirits are not at ease because my family is looking for me,” she said. Her maternal grandfather, Mr Luke Mdlongwa (83) said Ms Manyongore grew up under his care together with his seven other grandchildren but she was the only one who was having problems which had been classified as spiritual. He said his granddaughter recently suffered from a mental problem and prophets said it was because her family was not at ease. Mr Mdlongwa said his granddaughter was constantly reminding him that she wanted to meet her paternal family but he did not know where to start. “I have never met the Manyongore family or my granddaughter’s father. All I know is that they are from Bikita. My granddaughter is clearly troubled and things are not going well for her. Now that she has children of her own this problem is also affecting my great grandchildren as well. I have tried looking for the family at my own personal capacity but I have failed. If the family could reach out to me it would really help. They can contact me on 0715173013,” he said. – @DubeMatutu 