The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
ZIMBABWEAN entrepreneur based in the United States of America, Dr Devine Mafa, has been named among the world’s top 100 leading innovators in the automotive and transportation industry. He was honoured at the International Transportation and Automotive Summit (ITAS) Conference in America recently for innovating a self-driving car. Speaking by telephone from his base, Dr Mafa, who is the founder and director of Hende Moto, a company that manufactures three-wheeler vehicles and has an assembly plant in Kwekwe said: “An international award is a great responsibility. We must deliver and allow testing of new technology and change the road rules to accommodate new advancements that have been proven to supersede archaic systems. “Have you ever wondered why a wheelchair is finger driven but not a regular car using a steering column since Henry Ford invented it? A steering column is what kills people in a head-on collision.” Dr Mafa said the safest cars should be driven by fingers. “Look at the Hende Beluga. The best design ever conceived by a human brain. Our intelligence began with fingers, dexterity and tool creation,” he said. At present, the Hende Moto plant in Kwekwe imports 75 percent pre-assembled three-wheeler vehicles. Plans are in progress to have the units manufactured in Kwekwe. Recently, the company, which got registered in Zimbabwe in June 2019, announced that it had secured a partnership with a United States-based Max Sound Corp under a deal that would see the two providing high-definition audio technology on all Hende Moto vehicles. The proprietary audio software called MAX-D, which provides high-definition sound, is owned by the American firm. Commenting on the latest award, Max Sound Corp chief executive officer Mr Greg Halpern spoke highly about Dr Mafa. “Dr Mafa did a great job, more importantly it is some of the things he encountered and got involved when he was there (Zimbabwe),” he said. “He is also some of the biggest names in the industry and also it’s some of the biggest projects that we were working on, so we’ll be going those to the market.” — @okazunga