The Chronicle Business Reporter
ZIMBABWE is among six countries where the African Organisation for Standards (ARSO) targets to launch the completed harmonised African automotive standards. It is hoped that the harmonisation of standards in the automotive industry would accelerate development of the sector through cross-border trade. Greater impetus is expected if the move is adopted by individual countries under the African Continental Free Trade Agreement (AfCFTA). The African Association of Automotive Manufacturers (AAAM) recently signed a memorandum of understanding with AfreximBank paving the way for a collaboration aimed at supporting the emergence of a dynamic African automotive industry. It is hoped that harmonised standards will pave way for the elimination of tariff and non-tariff barriers to widen the markets for Africa’s automotive industry under the AfCFTA. The move is also expected to create a reliable network of automotive components and strengthening environmental performance through harmonisation of standards for fuels, roadworthiness, transportation of dangerous goods, power driven vehicles and homologation. In a statement AfreximBank, which has thrown its weight behind the initiative, said 250 standards will need to be harmonised based on the basic components, accessories and replacement parts, which are necessary to keep a vehicle safe and operational. “ARSO is planning to launch the completed harmonised African Automotive standards by June 2021 in s
Rwanda, Ghana, Nigeria, Malawi, South Africa and Zimbabwe. ARSO had initially targeted 18 basic standards based on the demands of the industry to facilitate the development of the automotive sector on the continent. Since inception of the project in 2019, ARSO has, with the support of the regional financier, been successful in harmonising 42 international standards. An initial grant provided by Afreximbank was critical in highlighting the importance of harmonising standards in the automotive sector and opened the way to other partners to come on board. AfreximBank said a German partner has now agreed to fund the second phase, targeting a further 100 standards with the goal of reaching 250 standards by the end of next year. Going forward, AfreximBank plans to organise an automotive show as part of the intra-African trade fair, which will give a platform to auto manufacturers, assemblers, original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) and component suppliers to exhibit their products and interact with potential buyers and suppliers. ARSO secretary general Dr Hermogene Nsengimana was quoted as saying: “Harmonisation of automotive sector standards is a collective effort of ARSO members States, private sector players and regulatory agencies.”