The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Back in the day, beer halls were a place where artistes would exhibit their specialities as local authorities engaged them so as to promote the creative sector. September 9, 1995, will always be remembered by many arts fanatics as this is the day that changed Black Umfolosi’s brand forever. Lolling on the wonder of their hit tune Unity that had been released five years prior, they had a rare opportunity to have the late Dr Joshua Nkomo officiate at their historic ground-breaking ceremony to mark the commencement of the construction of their Enkundleni Cultural Centre. Located near Entumbane Shopping Centre, the celebrations lasted the whole afternoon. In the evening, Highlanders Club House became the place to be as it played host to the after-party. It was an all-night show which featured the likes of Albert Nyathi whose melody Senzeni Na? had captured the hearts of millions of people. A day to remember it was. Over two decades have passed since the opening of the Enkundleni Centre, but for Black Umfolosi, the structure which still stands today and is the place they call home, can be attributed as their breakthrough to their journey of being one of the most respected and well-travelled groups worldwide. Saturday Leisure caught up with one of the group’s members Thomecki Dube, who on the day, headed the organising team. Dube went down memory lane and narrated how the day changed the face of imbube music as the presence of Dr Nkomo saw the group get support for their project from investors and the local authority, something that they will forever be indebted to the late Father Zimbabwe for. “Around 1995, arts was at its peak in the City of Kings and Queens. As Black Umfolosi, we managed to pull a huge following from Bulawayo residents and we were on demand countrywide and in Europe. “The setting up of our structure, one of the first designated for arts in the city managed to successfully transform imbube from beer garden music to music that would suit dynamic international standards,” said Dube. He said the groundbreaking ceremony of the $7 million Enkundleni Cultural Centre had a buy-in from many top leaders and arts groups, something that led to the group receiving more bookings outside the country. “The event was well-attended by great people who were so eager to see the arts industry succeed. Among these were the Town Clerk Dr Michael Mkanyiso Ndubiwa who died in May this year. “Other groups that were hot during the same time and I think were present include Amakhosi, Young Warriors by late Takawira, Iluba Elimnyama, Sunduza Boys, Izilwane Zenkangala, Black Spear and Impi Yosiko,” said Dube. He said as a group of 10 members back then, they were so grateful to the then Entumbane Councillor Bancinyane Wilson Ndiweni who managed to assist in ensuring that their application was passed in the council chambers. “At first we were allocated a rocky piece of land in the water stream dividing Emakhandeni and Entumbane and we couldn’t take it for the reason that it was far from the people and needed a lot of capital to move massive rocks. “I then, on behalf of Black Umfolosi, made an appeal for the present spot where Enkundleni is and the MP of the area, Dr Sikhanyiso Ndlovu also shared how he thought the groundbreaking needed to be graced by VVIPs. He then went ahead and invited the late Vice President Dr Nkomo.” Dr Nkomo was to be accompanied by several prominent people, a move that further put the group in the spotlight. “Father Zimbabwe came along with prominent people that included Mayor Joshua Malinga, Dr Eric Bloch the economist, Dr Dumiso Dabengwa, Housing Director Magagula, Mike Ndubiwa and many revered people who then became patrons of the centre too,” he said. Years later, the structure still stands and is pivotal in uniting the community of Entumbane. Dube went on to call on well-wishers to assist them as they intend to use the venue to stage virtual shows. “At the moment, the place which is also a multi-purpose centre houses an academy group and churches which at times conduct their services. We also make it accessible to other local artistes in order for them to grow their art. “However, due to the pandemic, we’ve been affected and if we can get funding to hold online shows for local artistes at the venue, it’ll be greatly appreciated,” said Dube. — @mthabisi_mthire