The Chronicle Mehluli Sibanda, Senior Sports Reporter
ZIMBABWE Sables coach Brendan Dawson has named a 23-man squad for the opening Rugby Africa Rugby Pool D match against Burkina to be played at Old Georgians Sports Club tomorrow. The Sables face off against the Stallions in two matches, with the second coming on Thursday to decide the winner of pool D after Tunisia withdrew as hosts and could not travel to Zimbabwe due to Covid-19 restrictions in the north African country. The competition is being used as a pathway for the 2023 Rugby World Cup qualifiers. Tyran Fagan has been chosen as loose-head prop, with Deanne Makoni down at hooker while Cleopas Kundiona will scrum down at tight-head prop to complete the front row. Sean Beevor and David Makamba will lock down the scrum in the second row, with the back row made up of Biselele Tshamala, the most experienced player in the Sables’ team with 40 caps at left flanker, Blithe Mavesere at right flanker and Sebastian Roche at number eight. Skipper Hilton Mudariki starts at scrumhalf to form a halfback pairing with Keith Chiwara. Matthew McNab and Shingirai Katsvere are expected to provide wings, while Marcus Nel starts at inside centre with Brandon Mudzekenyedzi on the outside. Martin Mangongo is the last man in defence at full-back. Matthew Mandioma, Royal Mwale, Riaan O’Neill and Shayne Makombe are some of the experienced players named on the bench. The Sables have been in camp for two months and managed to play two friendly matches against Zambia, both of which they comfortably won. Fine-tuning friendlies against Namibia and Portugal were cancelled due to the Covid-19 pandemic. Zimbabwe Sables
Tyran Fagan, Deanne Makoni, Cleopas Kundiona, Sean Beevor, David Makamba, Biselele Tshamala, Blithe Mavesere, Sebastian Roche, Hilton Mudariki (captain), Keith Chiwara, Matthew McNab, Marcus Nel, Brandon Mudzekenyedzi, Shingirai Katsvere, Martin Mangongo
Replacements: Matthew Mandioma, Doug Juszczyk, Royal Mwale, Godfrey Muzanargwo, Dudlee White-Sharpley, Riaan O’Neill, Shayne Makombe, Aiden Burnett
Coach: Brendan Dawson
Assistant coach: Liam Middleton
Assistant coach: Graham Knoop
Technical analyst: Takunda Chifokoyo
Team manager: Jason Maritz
Physiotherapist: Alice Randal