The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
Warriors coach Zdravko Logarusic should have been sacked after Zimbabwe’s disastrous performance in this year’s Chan tournament held in Cameroon, a member of the Zifa technical and development committee has confided in Chronicle Sport. The Croatian, whose coaching credentials have been questioned, has won just one match in 12 outings with the national team, the worst ever statistic by any Warriors’ coach. Warriors fans have called for his firing following the team’s dismal performances in the Cosafa Cup, especially the embarrassing loss to Namibia last Sunday. It has now emerged that the technical and development committee had recommended to the Zifa executive committee that Loga be released from his contract after the Warriors’ 0-1 loss to Mali in their last Chan game in January. “We agreed that the fella was just clueless and we must disengage from him as we had no prospects of doing better in future national team assignments, especially World Cup qualifiers coming soon. Remember the qualifiers were supposed to start in June,” said the technical and development committee member. He said their recommendations divided the Zifa executive committee, as some felt the coach should be given more time to prove himself. “Their comfort was that he had led the team to the Afcon finals, but we all knew that that wasn’t true. Joe Antipas assembled that team; this guy got four points from a possible 12 while Antipas got a similar number of points from a possible six,” he said. The Warriors were yesterday beaten 1-2 by Senegal in what was a must win tie in order to entertain any dreams of progressing in the Cosafa Cup. However, it was not to be despite the Warriors going ahead from the spot in the second minute, as the Teranga Lions launched a dramatic come back in the second half. Yesterday’s match could have been the last dance with the national team for Loga, whose Uefa Pro Licence badge expired last month, with no evidence that he sat for another examination for it to be renewed. He has just six months of his disastrous contract left with Zifa.