The Chronicle Health, Dr Tatenda Simango Juvenile arthritis (JA), also known as pediatric rheumatic disease is not a specific disease. It’s an umbrella term to describe the inflammatory and rheumatic diseases that develop in children under the age of 16. The exact causes of JA are unknown but researchers believe that certain genes may cause JA when activated by a virus, bacteria or other external factors. There is no evidence that foods, toxins, allergies or lack of vitamins cause the disease. Most kinds of JA are auto-immune or auto-inflammatory diseases. That means the immune system, which is supposed to fight against foreign invaders like viruses and germs, gets confused and releases inflammatory chemicals that attack healthy cells and tissue. In most JA cases, this causes joint inflammation, swelling, pain and tenderness, but some types of JA have few or no joint symptoms or only affect the skin and internal organs. There are five types of juvenile arthritis: This can cause difficultly moving or completing everyday tasks. Joint symptoms may worsen after waking up or staying in one position too long. The goals of JA treatment are to: The most common signs and symptoms of juvenile idiopathic arthritis are: Blood tests can be conducted to help confirm the diagnoses and see the extend of illness or progress of treatment. Other investigations that can be done include X-rays` or magnetic resonance imaging to assess for fractures, cancers or congenital defects. Some types of juvenile idiopathic arthritis can cause serious complications, such as growth problems, joint damage and eye inflammation. Treatment focuses on controlling pain and inflammation, improving function, and preventing damage. Physical or occupational therapist may also recommend that your child make use of joint supports or splints to help protect joints and keep them in a good functional position. Adequate calcium in the diet is important because children with juvenile idiopathic arthritis are at risk of developing weak bones due to the disease, the use of corticosteroids, and decreased physical activity and weight bearing. Family members can play critical roles in helping children cope with their condition. As a parent, you may want to try the following: Till next week stay safe.