The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter HAVING had a refreshing off-season holiday at home, Warriors’ striker Tinotenda Kadewere is looking forward to an improved second season in the French top tier league. Kadewere is in his second season at Lyon and missed his team’s last two games of the 2020/21 championship due to a muscle injury. His side narrowly missed out on the Champions League spot after finishing fourth. The Zimbabwean striker who started his debut Ligue 1 season on fire scoring seven goals between October and December, was plagued by injuries that affected his form. Kadewere scored three goals this year and finished the season on 10 goals. The former Harare City star weighed in with three assists in 33 matches this season for Lyon. Lyon now have a new coach, Peter Bosz, who replaced Rudi Garcia that brought Kadewere to the club. Kadewere told Chronicle Sport that he is looking forward to working with the new coach and perform better than last season. “I’m looking forward to my second season in Ligue 1 and I’m happy and strong minded that it will be all positive. My first season in Ligue 1 was a dream come true and knowing that there are a lot of expectations gives me more strength to want to work extra hard. “It is so good to be back and getting to start work. I’ve met the new coach, he is a very good guy and has strong ambitions for the team. I’m looking forward to working with him and I know and believe that it will all be positive,” said Kadewere. On lessons learnt from last season, Kadewere said: “A season can turn in just a matter of weeks. You need to make sure you take every game as a final because all teams are capable of doing anything.” The Warriors’ striker wants to forget about the pain he endured last season. “Last season ended very badly for me because of injuries but it happens and it’s part of the game. Now I just have to make sure that I work hard and come back stronger. I’m still doing rehab but there is some progress now and I look forward to being back on the pitch very soon,” Kadewere said. He said being close to his family during the off-season break gave him strength to kickstart the new season on a high. — @ZililoR