The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
MAKOKOBA and Pumula suburbs have the highest number of residents paying bills in foreign currency as Bulawayo City Council (BCC) records improved bill payments following a poor start at the beginning of the year. The improved payment of bills is expected to improve service delivery in the city. The local authority said in January it was collecting 11 percent of the expected total revenues but as of May, it was now collecting 73 percent of its estimated billing. In January, against a target of $429 million, the local authority received just over $48 million, in February the city recorded 27 percent in revenue collections after rate payers paid $113 million from a target of $413 million. In March, rates payment increased to 68 percent as $283 million was paid to the local authority against a target of $418 million, the figures dropped to $266 million in April from a target of $434 million, accounting to 61 percent payments. In May, payments shot up to 73 percent of the total billing after the city recorded $304 million in payments against $414 million target. This has seen city fathers demanding that improved bill payments should also be complemented by improvement in service delivery. The local authority has in the past come under fire for failing to collect garbage, not attending burst sewer on time and rehabilitating potholed filled roads. The cash flow challenges saw BCC failing to pay employees’ salaries on time last year resulting in strikes by council workers. Despite improved payment of bills, the city’s finances are still in the red as rate payers still owe the local authority close to $1,6 billion while it owes creditors $1 billion. In the latest council report, the city’s finance director Mr Kimpton Ndimande said the payments will see council improving on service delivery and payment of salaries. “Suburbs like Makokoba and Pumula were collecting more revenue in foreign currency. Some capital equipment had been acquired and there would be improved service delivery in the near future. Acquisition of equipment was a very long process as it relied on borrowing capital funds. Council was trying to balance up the ratio between service delivery and staff remuneration,” reads the report. Sharing on the same subject, director of engineering services Engineer Simela Dube said council is set to procure a new vehicle fleet. “Council was looking forward to acquire a JCB excavator, a grader and 15 motor vehicles. Revenue from the 77 Selborne Park stands and devolution funds would be used. Currently, council could not borrow,” said Eng Dube. Another council’s senior manager, the chamber secretary Mrs Sikhangele Zhou said salaries backlog has been cleared, therefore the revenues being collected will be mainly channelled towards services. “The community groups will be paid as soon as the issues relating to the rates have been attended to. Considerations for hiring contract labourers to clear the outstanding sewer blockages were being made to complement the work of contractors who were already on the ground,” said Mrs Zhou. Bulawayo mayor Councillor Solomon Mguni commended residents for the improved rate payments. For a long time, residents have blamed the local authority for falling standards while the council has been adamant that services come at a price. Other councillors urged management to translate improved bill payments to better service delivery. Meanwhile, the city’s deputy mayor, Clr Mlandu Ncube, expressed concern that council has been failing to deliver on housing which has caused conflict with residents. “Other services came as a result of housing services delivery. From 2013 to 2018 a few housing development projects were commissioned. The late payments by beneficiaries affected the entire scheme. In some cases, contractors were not paid in time affecting stands provision. Luveve 5 re-sale scheme was one of the best schemes. In some areas a number of challenges were faced. Emganwini pre-sale stands and roads were still outstanding. Beneficiaries had not yet started constructions,” said Clr Ncube. Clr Mguni concurred with his deputy adding that housing tenders were being cancelled while council is not commissioning any housing projects. He said council is failing to meet its quarterly targets on provision of residential stands. — @nqotshili