The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Online Reporter MANY commuters this morning shunned pirate kombis as they opted to board Zupco buses and kombis following a nasty experience the previous day which saw them walk a long distance to town after kombis dropped them along the way following a police blitz. Meanwhile some pirate kombis have doubled their fares citing that their operations were now tough because of the police blitz. Pirate kombis plying the Cowdray Park route are now travelling via Richmond in order to evade the police. These pirate kombis are reportedly dropping off commuters along 1st Avenue after promising to drop them off at their usual drop off point along 6th Avenue. Commuters who spoke to the Chronicle said they could not risk being dropped off along the way after paying $100 which some pirate kombis were now charging. A snap survey in some western suburbs some commuters stood at bustops and ignored calls from pirate kombi touts for them to board the vehicles and indicated that they were waiting for the bus. Ms Nomagugu Ndlovu said she usually boards pirate kombis but she had opted for a bus. “I had a nasty experience yesterday and I can’t relive it. I had to walk from Makokoba to my workplace at 11th Avenue and George Silundika after the kombi dropped me along the way. Today I vowed to myself that I will not board a pirate kombi. Several of them passed and called out for me to board but I refused. I boarded a Zupco bus and it dropped me off in town,” she said. Another commuter, Mr Evans Tshuma said he disembarked along the way after the kombi crew failed to assure him that they would drop him off in town. “I boarded a pirate kombi and when I was inside they told me that they were now charging $100 instead of $50. I further inquired whether they would drop us off in town but they failed to give me a definite response. I disembarked soon after boarding the kombi and later boarded a bus. I couldn’t pay $100 for transportation that will drop me off along the way,” he said. Police in Bulawayo have launched a crackdown on pirate kombis and taxis commonly known as mshikashikas as the law enforcement agents continue to intensify the fight against violators of lockdown measures. Yesterday pirate taxis and kombis plying the Luveve route were dumping people in Makokoba while those using Khami Road were being dropped at the VID turn off. Kombis and pirate taxis plying the Plumtree Road route were dropping off passengers at corner 15th Avenue and Herbert Chitepo Street. – @DubeMatutu