The Chronicle Business Reporter
Sadc will tomorrow hold a Joint Committee of Ministers of Transport, Information Communication and Technology (ICT), Information and Meteorology meeting to discuss sectoral issues of infrastructure development in support of regional integration and development. The ministers will, among the key issues, consider and discuss the reports of the Sadc civil aviation committee, Sadc roads, road transport and traffic committee and Sadc railways committee. In a statement the regional bloc said discussions were aimed at accelerating the development of transport infrastructure in all modes and regional corridors, harmonisation of transport laws, regulations and standards and liberalisation of the sector for better performance. In addition, it said the regional ministers will review progress on implementation of regional guidelines and measures to respond to Covid-19, which has so far frustrated integration and economic development programmes especially trade facilitation. On ICT, the ministers are expected to deliberate on issues aimed at ensuring enhanced information and communication technologies including Sadc broadband targets 2025, approaches to universal access and service, framework for establishing the Sadc Regional Computer Incident Response Teams (CIRT). This will also buttress the Sadc framework for a shared satellite system and status of regional internet exchange points (RIXPs). “The ministers will also discuss harmonisation of various strategies on meteorology, the work of the Sadc Climate Services Centre (CSC), sustainability of the Southern Africa Regional Climate Outlook Forum (SARCOF) and the Satellite and Weather Information for Disaster Resilience in Africa (SAWIDRA) Project,” said the bloc. “Sadc’s transport, ICT, information and meteorology sectors are some of the key pillars of the Sadc Regional Infrastructure Development Master Plan (RIDMP) and the Sadc Infrastructure Vision 2027, which recognise infrastructure as the bedrock of economic development and the deepening of regional integration. “Guided by the RIDMP, the Sadc transport sector strives for an efficient transport system to facilitate trade, socio-economic ties and regional integration.” Under the ICT sector, Sadc is keen to develop the information and communications industry through expanded voice telephony, undersea fibre optic cables, and constant worldwide Internet access to allow immediate global contact and transfer of information. Meanwhile, the Sadc meteorological sector works in partnership with the World Meteorological Organisation to mitigate the risks of changes in weather patterns that can affect key industries such as agriculture and power generation for the region to accelerate regional integration and economic development. The ministers’ meeting is being preceded by the meeting of senior officials that started Tuesday, ending today.