The Chronicle Proverbs 11:1
The Lord abhors dishonest scales, but accurate weights are his delight. NIV
Faithfulness is not just a word or an act, it is a condition of the heart. I want to help you understand why some of your lives are still oscillating on the same levels while others are going in circles. Some have been through deliverance many times but they still do not seem to abound in blessings. God does not look at your physical appearance; He looks at the heart of a man because it is in the heart of a man he can find an Emunah. The business world is where dishonesty is rife and it is disheartening how many industrialists are capitulating to these acts. They have become so rife to an extent it is now normal, and many do not even have a guilty conscience when doing it. Where is faithfulness? I have noticed that in shops, dishonesty is at its peak. For instance, many tamper with their scales such that when they weigh things like meat, vegetables, tomatoes, cooked meals; it appears to be more than its normal legal standard weight. Some people even go on to change their prices according to the financial status of each customer. It is impossible to prosper if you are dishonest. The devil may deceive you by enriching you for some time, but this is just a hoax to trap you. It is like a mirage of riches and a good life. God wants justice, and He condemns every business planted or growing on false grounds. When one cheats in business, he may escape from earthly justice but he will not escape from heavenly justice. Leviticus 19:35-36
Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in meteyard, in weight, or measure. Just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin, shall ye have: I [am] the LORD your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt.(KJV) Deuteronomy 25:13
Thou shalt not have in thy bag divers weights, a great and a small.(KJV) Any nation where there is corruption rising lingers in poverty. The unfaithful person abounds with poverty. Let us strive to be faithful as a nation. God bless!
eaglelifeassembly@yahoo.com