The Chronicle They may have been rivals during their managerial careers but Jose Mourinho and Arsene Wenger have finally found something to agree on. The pair were foes during their time in London with Chelsea and Arsenal respectively, with the duo regularly coming to verbal blows and at one time a touchline fracas. Their relationship has improved since Wenger’s retirement in 2018 and the pair have worked as pundits together when Mourinho has been out of work, most notably following his departure from Manchester United. And the pair were able to put their differences aside following England’s 2-1 win against Denmark in the Euro2020 semi-finals as they agreed that a controversial winner from Harry Kane should not have stood. The Three Lions were awarded a penalty in extra-time after Raheem Sterling was adjuged to have been fouled in the area but replays showed there was little contact and Mourinho and Wenger felt VAR should have intervened. “I say the way I see it, not the way it is. Maybe you don’t like my opinion this time,”Mourinho told TalkSPORT. “It’s never a penalty. The best team won, England deserve to win. England was fantastic, but for me it’s never a penalty. “The best team won, England are a better team than Denmark. Denmark played the way I was expecting them to play on to their limits. “England was really, really good and no doubt they deserved to win that match/ But, for me, it’s never a penalty. At this level, a semi-final of a Euro I don’t understand really the referee’s decision.” “I don’t understand even less the fact that the VAR didn’t bring the referee to the screen or overturn the decision. For me it’s never a penalty. “So as a football man I’m very happy England won – don’t get me wrong – and I think they deserve to win – don’t get me wrong. But as a football man, I am disappointed that penalty was given. I thought England would win it.” Wenger agreed, insisting he could not understand how VAR did not intervene to give the referee another look at the incident. “No penalty,” Wenger told BeIN Sports. “Look in the moment like that I believe that the VAR I don’t understand why they don’t ask the referee to have a look at it. In a moment like that it’s important that the referee is absolutely convinced that it was a penalty. “It was not clear enough to say ‘yes it is’. At least he should have looked on the screen. I don’t know why the VAR did not ask him to go. For me no penalty. I think the VAR has let the referee down.” – Mirror Sport