The Chronicle Prosper Ndlovu
PRESIDENT Mnangagwa yesterday paid a courtesy visit to veteran nationalist and former freedom fighter, Cde Jane Ngwenya (86), at her Coronation Cottages home in Bulawayo where they discussed a range of issues. Known as a ‘rabble-rouser’ and a ‘no-nonsense’ woman because of her strong political convictions during her time, Cde Ngwenya was one of the few women to be involved in nationalist politics at the top level during the struggle. She is one of the most senior surviving former Zapu nationalists and has remained loyal to the revolution. For Cde Ngwenya, the liberation of the country was everything hence she defied societal demands and patriarchy by sacrificing her marriage for the love of her country. This saw her being arrested and detained for long periods. Now in her old age and frail looking, Cde Ngwenya is still intellectually sharp and yesterday managed to engage so well with President Mnangagwa. “She is a veteran of the liberation struggle; I am one of her products. When we were youths, she was our boss,” said President Mnangagwa in an interview with journalists after a brief closed-door chat with Cde Ngwenya. “Many years ago, none of you were there, she looked after us. So, it’s now our turn to look after her.  “I’m happy that she is ok, she is very clear. I have asked her what she wants and she has told me. I will do my best to satisfy her needs, and it is my duty again now as the Head of State to make sure that persons like her who suffered for this country should be well looked after.” Commenting on Cde Ngwenya’s health condition the President said:
“She is very clear, very lucid. Yes, she is weak but she is very clear. We discussed very well without problems and I said what do you want? She wants fruits! So, I said I will have a scotch cart of fruits tomorrow, to come here.” As soon as President Mnangagwa left, fellow cadres; Cdes Judith Ncube who is Bulawayo Provincial Minister of State, Defence Minister Cde Oppah Muchinguri-Kashiri and Senator Cde Molly Mpofu remained and also took time to engage with Cde Ngwenya. In the early 1960s Cde Ngwenya served detention at Grey Street Prison, now Bulawayo Prison, and WhaWha detention camp in Gweru before being taken to Gonakudzingwa where she met several nationalists who were also incarcerated at the camp. She credits her political career to strong inspiration from founding nationalists such as the late Vice-President Joshua Nkomo, Benjamin Burombo, Joseph Msika and Josiah Chinamano, and the late former President, Robert Mugabe. Cde Ngwenya who served as Deputy Minister of Labour, Manpower Planning and Social Welfare in the early 80s was involved in the formation of the Southern Rhodesia African National Congress in 1952, the National Democratic Party in 1960 and Zapu two years later.