The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
POPULAR outdoor spot Hartsfield Tshisanyama in Bulawayo is now operating under new management that has set a vision to turn the eatery into a tourist attraction. The new hands said they are “redesigning” the place in order to draw the discerning food lovers who seek to indulge in a spacious and engaging environment. In support of the ongoing domestic tourism strategy #ZimBho campaign, Hartsfield Tshisanyama would be positioned to promote culinary tourism as the business seeks a different trajectory. Silimukho Moyo, the new face of the joint said the place is open as a chill spot that welcomes even families that want to experience a day of good meals and music. “As new runners for Hartsfield Tshisanyama we want people to come, relax and have their drinks while in a mellow environment with toned down music,” said Moyo. The place is run under strict Covid-19 regulations, allowing 50 percent of its clients at a time. Hartsfield Tshisanyama has a bigger seating area with over 20 wooden tables and is well tented with good lighting. “The braai area has also been spruced up and most importantly, there is no gate charge. “The hospitality is still unmatched as we have created employment for over ten locals, a crew that is always attentive and at the service of their patrons,” she said. Interestingly, it is on Sunday that the popular spot is at its peak with patrons, some from as far as Harare and Johannesburg, flocking the joint as soon as the gates open at midday. This is attributed to the refreshing atmosphere because of the side view lawn that was installed. The spot is now family-friendly rather than an area known for booze-filled partying with loud music. “Hartsfield Tshisanyama is a place for people to enjoy sundowners while winding down after a long day at work or a hard night of partying,” said Moyo. She said weekends are a hit and people should make a visit. “From the weekdays to the weekends we are open for business and closely following the Covid-19 regulations thus people should feel free to come,” said Moyo. To add to the barbecue that the spot is known for, Moyo said traditional foods to the menu for variety will be a hit as they promote Zimbabwean cultures to the full. — @mthabisi_mthire.