The Chronicle Judith Phiri, Chronicle Reporter
HAMARA Zimbabwe continues to unlock the productive potential of small-scale farmers by giving them access to quality standard inputs, world-class training and technical support and access to vibrant markets. Given this support, most small-holder farmers are now offering some of the best products and easy to grow chick breeds. The newly introduced chick breeds, which has been on the market for the past one and a half year, include Sasso C431 brown broiler, Sussex dual purpose and Sasso T-Rainbow dual purpose. Hamara head of marketing and public relations, Mr Clarence Mutangara, said their company was running several programmes, which have recorded success among participating farmers. “We are currently having Sasso contract farming with farmers in Kezi and Ntabazinduna. We also have community arrangements where we supply Sasso chicks and provide farmers with the markets in areas such as Ndolwane,” he said. “The Sasso mother unit (Brooder) programme where farmers grow chicks from day old to four weeks and then sell them. Other farmers buy at four weeks and then sell at eight weeks or keep them for layers. We have witnessed great success among farmers throughout the country,” said Mr Mutangara. He also noted that with the Sasso programme, they give farmers chicks, which they feed and then sell back to Hamara as point of lay. Mr Mutangara said that most of their Sasso C431 brown broilers were hybrid birds suited for commercial meat production. Both males and females could achieve 2.2kg to 2.5kgs in just seven to eight weeks and after 13 weeks the males could hit a weight of up to 4.8kg and the females could grow up to 3.6kg. He noted that the Sussex dual purpose were hybrid birds that are best suited for serious egg production and casual eat production with the females laying up to 290 eggs per year, per bird. The males could be slaughter-ready at 2.2kg in 12 weeks. Meanwhile, Mr Mutangara said the Ssasso T-Rainbow were dual purpose hybrid birds that are suited for both egg and meat production. The layers could lay up to 260 eggs per year and the males grew fast and could be slaughtered at 2.2kg to 2.5kg in nine to 10 weeks when well fed. Hamara Foods has also offered starter, grower and finisher feeds for the chick production. The business is located in Umguza with a division focused on broiler and layer day old chick production, as well as producing point of lay birds. Hamara runs the only breeder farm in Matabeleland, which is one of the few in Zimbabwe. A farmer from Mafanisa Ward 4 in Ntabazinduna, Mrs Gloria Mlilo, said her quarter-fed-free range Sasso C143 chicks are adaptive to any conditions and are easy to feed. She also noted that with a lot of water the birds grow well and were easier to breed than broilers. “I can safely advise other farmers to consider these birds. Unlike broilers, which need extra care and attention, these Sasso C143 you can sleep safely at night knowing that in the morning your birds will be fine,” added Mrs Mlilo. Another farmer from North End in Bulawayo only identified as Mrs Sibanda, said she initially had 400 Sasso T-Rainbow birds and sold the male ones when they were at about 12 weeks although at eight weeks, they were ready for selling. “These birds are easy to keep and l usually opt to sell them when they are now fully-fledged to gain more income. The ones left l am breeding them to get eggs. They are now 19 weeks and they are not giving me any problems and l get about 25 eggs per day,” she said. By the time they get to 21 or 25 weeks the farmer expects to be getting much more as the birds were in good health similar to that of road runners, even though these ones were kept in a layer fowl run. Mr Sibanda advised farmers who want to generate continuous income to start small with these three types of chick breeds from Hamara and grow as they go because returns were guaranteed. Hamara’s vision is for Zimbabwe to not only be able to feed themselves but to be a nation that exports produce and supplies the rest of Africa. Their vision is to unlock the productive engine of Zimbabwe, which is the small-scale farmers and equipping them to reach their highest potential.