The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter CHARLES Sibanda, the 2010 Soccer Star of the Year, has been left out of Bulawayo Chiefs’ squad registered to compete in the Chibuku Super Cup tournament that kicks off on Saturday, May 22. Sibanda was a notable absentee in the 27-man squad unveiled by Chiefs on Tuesday. The 35-year-old former Highlanders and FC Platinum forward has been granted permission to club-hunt following the expiry of his contract. Sibanda joined Chiefs at the beginning of 2020 after his deal with FC Platinum expired. Sibanda’s omission from Chiefs’ squad might signal the end of his playing days. The Entumbane-bred footie started his Premiership journey with Hwange FC in 2008 before he joined the now defunct Motor Action a year later, with whom he won his first league title in the same year that he was crowned Soccer Star of the Year. He left to join FC Platinum in 2011 and was with them until 2014 when signed for Highlanders before packing his bags for the now defunct How Mine. He had a second stint with FC Platinum where he won two league titles in 2018 and 2019. Among players Sibanda arrived with at Chiefs last year are midfielder Joe Nyabinde and defender Ben Nyahunzvi, who were released by Chicken Inn. Chiefs have also retained the Ghanaian pair of defender Isaac Badu and winger Samuel Antwi. Goalkeeper David Bizabani, defender Marlvin Mkolo, dribbling wizard Arthur Musiiwa and striker Farau Matare, who were linked with departures, have also been retained. Chiefs only lost utility player Shadreck Nyahwa to Dynamos. Coach Thulani Sibanda said attacking midfielder Clement Makamba, who picked up a career threatening injury in 2019, and left-back Tarisai Chikwende will be registered in the next transfer window. Bulawayo Chiefs squad Goalkeepers: David Bizabani, Matripples Muleya Defenders: Ben Nyahunzwi, Isaac Badu, Felix Moyo, Marlvin Mkolo, Phelious Sibanda, Panashe Shoko, Gift Gumbo, Danny Millias, Arthur Ndlovu Midfielders: Lucky Ndlela, Billy Veremu, Corey-Eli Black, Joe Nyabinde, Desire Shumbanhete, Samuel Antwi, Arthur Musiiwa, Mthokozisi Msebe Strikers: Farau Matare, Kundishora Chakanyuka, Dominic Jaricha, Huughe Chikosa, Fredrick Muza Developmental (Under-20): Marlvern Hativagone, Denzel Ncube, Thomas Mudzengerere – @ZililoR 