The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter IN-FORM striker Prince Dube, who missed Zimbabwe’s last two Afcon qualifiers in March due to injury, has been included in the 30-man Warriors’ provisional squad for the 2022 World Cup qualifiers. The Warriors are in Group G alongside South Africa, who they face in the opening match between June 5 and 8, former continental champions Ghana and Ethiopia. Ghana are the best ranked team in the group, as they are seventh in Africa and 49th in the world, followed by South Africa, who are 15th in Africa and 75th in the world, while the Warriors are ranked 24th in Africa and 107th in world rankings. Ethiopia is lowly ranked at 40th in Africa and 140th in the world. After their encounter against Bafana Bafana, Zimbabwe will travel to Ethiopia before taking a long break. Qualifiers will resume in September, with the Warriors taking on Ghana in back-to-back encounters. The Warriors will be hoping for a good start, as coach Zdravko Logarusic’s squad is dominated by foreign-based stars that have been active. Only three locally-based players, Highlanders’ goalkeeper Ariel Sibanda, Caps United defender Carlos Mavhurume and Dynamos midfielder King Nadolo, have been included in the provisional squad. From the squad that dis duty for Zimbabwe against Botswana and Zambia in the March Afcon qualifiers, midfielder Last Jesi, whose contract was terminated by Al Hilal of Sudan, and Victor Kamhuka have been left out. “On Jesi, the coach said he should sort out his issues following reports that he has been released by his club. Kevin Moyo of Nkana FC in Zambia was also left out because he hasn’t been feeling well,” said Wellington Mupandare, the Warriors manager. The injured pair of Kaizer Chiefs attacker Khama Billiat and Orlando Pirates’ striker Terence Dzukamanja have been included in the provisional squad. “From the look of things, Khama is likely to be available based on the initial medical assessment. As for Dzvukamanja, it’s 50-50 because we’re not sure whether he’ll go for an operation or not,” Mupandare added. United Kingdom-based players, who include Aston Villa’s Marvelous Nakamba and Wigan’s Tendayi Darikwa as well as the France-based pair of Marshal Munetsi and Tino Kadewere, who missed the last national assignment due to stringent Covid-19 travelling restrictions, have been included in the squad.  Warriors squad: Goalkeepers: Ariel Sibanda (Highlanders), Martin Mapisa (Zamora CF), Talbert Shumba (Nkana) Defenders: Alec Mudimu (Ankaraspor), Divine Lunga (Lamontville Golden Arrows), Tendayi Darikwa (Wigan Athletic), Teenage Hadebe (Yeni Malatyaspor), Jimmy Dzingai (Nkana), Jordan Zemura (AFC Bournemouth), Onismor Bhasera (SuperSport United), Takudzwa Chimwemwe (Nkana), Brendan Galloway (Luton Town), Carlos Mavhurume (Caps United) Midfielders: Marshall Munetsi (Stade de Reims), Butholezwe Ncube (Amazulu), Ovidy Karuru (Black Leopards), Marvelous Nakamba (Aston Villa), Kudakwashe Mahachi (SuperSport United), Knowledge Musona (KAS Eupen), Khama Billiat (Kaizer Chiefs), Perfect Chikwende (Simba), Thabani Kamusoko (Zesco United), King Nadolo (Dynamos), Tafadzwa Rusike (Zesco United) Strikers: Tinotenda Kadewere (Lyon), David Moyo (Hamilton Academical), Prince Dube (Azam), Admiral Muskwe (Wycombe Wanderers), Knox Mutizwa (Lamontville Golden Arrows), Terrence Dzvukamanja (Orlando Pirates) -@ZililoR 