The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
ELITE referees that served domestic football in the topflight for more than a decade Ruzive Ruzive and Nkosana Nduna have retired from officiating to become match commissioners. The duo was among 30 assessors that attended a two-day match commissioners’ seminar held by the Zimbabwe Referees Committee (ZRC) and facilitated by renowned Fifa instructor Felix Tangawarima. Former Fifa panel referee Tapfumaneyi Mutengwa and ex-Zifa panel referee Bongani Gadzikwa also attended the commissioners’ course, joining the old guard of Wilfred Mukuna, Tendai Bwanya, John Madziva, Kenny Marange, David Sibanda, Warren Phiri and Zifa Matabeleland North chairman Dennis Tshuma, who is also a member of ZRC. ZRC chairman Bryton Malandule said they were happy to welcome the new crop of match commissioners, adding that by pursuing the assessors’ path, retired referees are not lost to the game. “As ZRC, our thrust is to deliver top class officiating and that starts with capacitating these officials. It is good to have a new breed of commissioners in the form of top class referees that have just retired after serving the game with honour and dignity,” said Malandule. Three female commissioners Rusina Kuda Majo, an ex-Fifa referee who retired three years ago, Lucky Ngwenya and Faith Mutumwa attended the course. The trio joins experienced assessor and Fifa instructor Sabelo Sibindi on the list of top female match commissioners.
Malandule bemoaned the lack of participation by women as match commissioners. “We’re still trying to recruit more new females. In Division One we have the likes of Samu Silengane, Evelyn Rimai and Jenifer Ncube. We continue to encourage and call on retired female referees to consider taking up roles as match commissioners and assessors,” said Malandule. Meanwhile, referees will now be subjected to physical assessments during matches. “Modern commissioning entails that assessment mustn’t leave out physical valuation of referees. It’s a new thing which is being fused into match commissioning. For this course, we brought in chief physical instructor Makonese Masakadza, as well as physical instructors Khanyile Dlamini and Morris Banda, who shared what the match commissioners should look at when making physical assessments. There will be some matches where we will have both a physical assessor and conventional assessor evaluating the referee,” said Malandule. — @ZililoR