The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
AS workers of the world commemorated Workers Day last Saturday, a football club that has contributed immensely to the development of the game in Bulawayo, Ajax Hotspurs from Mpopoma, was celebrating its 20 years of existence. In their 20 years, Ajax Hotspurs have been churning out talent after talent that has lit the local football landscape. The side played twice in the Zifa Southern Region Division One League, first in 2012 just for a season, and only returned in 2019 after a long absence. They have done well to navigate the demanding First Division and in the junior leagues without sponsorship, and have been relying on the benevolence of well-wishers to meet affiliation fees and referees’ allowances. Besides the challenges that they have faced, they have managed to occupy a “big” space in Bulawayo’s junior development landscape since being launched as the brainchild of director Siphambaniso Dube. Ajax have now launched an online crowdfunding initiative to raise at least US$3 000 to fund the Ajax Hotspurs @20 Youth Tournament. “We want to host a tournament for youngsters to enjoy as we did during our 10th Anniversary in 2011.If we can raise anything between US$2 000 and US$3 000, that will cover all expenses required for the celebrations,” said Dube. The club deserves to celebrate its achievement as it has weathered economic challenges to remain operational and continue helping in talent development. Despite the challenges that they face, Dube said they’ll strive to stay afloat. “The major challenges are obviously financial and equipment-wise. The economic environment has been hostile and tying down sound sponsorship has been a headache, more so when most still treat sport in general as leisure and not as a profession. We are yet to commercialise sport and the Government has to ignite this path with sound policies like tax rebates. “Being in the First Division and Junior League hasn’t been easy, as it is survival of the fittest, yet passion and love of the game have been the push factor. This has been the drive against all odds and we keep on believing that we will strike the right code someday. It might not be now, but the legacy might be enjoyed by future generations. We still remain hopeful,” Dube said. Besides the love and passion for junior development that has kept Dube going, it is the thought of changing “someone’s life for the better” that gives him satisfaction. Ajax’s 20 years of success would not be complete without mentioning their development coach Gugulethu Dlomo. The 42-year-old was retired by Dube as a player in 2005 and tasked with establishing Ajax’s juniors in 2006. They started off with the Under-13s, and looking back, Dlomo is happy that his products have gone on to excel beyond Zimbabwean borders. National team left-back Divine Lunga, who is in the books of South African PSL side Lamontville Golden Arrows, is one of Dlomo’s Ajax products. Former Caps United midfielder Chrispen Machisi, FC Platinum midfielder Denzel Khumalo and Highlanders’ central defender Peter Muduhwa, who had a non-playing stint with Simba Sports Club of Tanzania, all passed through Dlomo’s hands. “The journey has been exciting. I’ve been fortunate to coach the likes of Machisi, Lunga, Mudhuwa, Khumalo, former Bantu Rovers defender Thulani Gumede and Highlanders’ left-back Mbongeni Ndlovu. “As a juniors’ coach, nothing beats the satisfaction of making a positive impact on a footballer who grows to achieve a lot. One thing I’ve learnt is that not all footballers you coach will make it big; some are lost along the way, but that doesn’t kill the spirit,” said Dlomo. He gives credit to Highlanders’ legend Douglas Mloyi, renowned development coaches Ali Baba Dube and Dumaza Dube for encouraging him to pursue his passion. “Ajax has no money, but the project is meant to make a difference in the lives of Mpopoma youngsters and Bulawayo as a whole. We are doing our part to keep children away from the streets. As they say, an idle mind is the devil’s workshop, we believe we can inspire kids and give them hope by playing football.” A holder of the Zimbabwe Soccer Coaches Association (Zisca) Level 2 badge, Dlomo dreams of capacitating himself with Caf courses. “I want to upgrade myself so that I train my players using the latest techniques. Even without Caf courses, I’ve been doing research to keep myself abreast with global trends,” said Dlomo. He bemoaned the lack of junior tournaments unlike in the past. “There must be an investment in junior development. Playing lots of tournaments brings excitement to kids. For example, we used to have the YES (Youth Education through Sport) competitions, Grassroots sponsored junior tournaments and the Benjani Mwaruwari competitions, which brought excitement. “The cancerous age-cheating must also be dealt with because it deprives the right-aged youngsters an opportunity to represent the country in various age group teams. I was saddened last year when the Young Warriors were suspended at the Cosafa tournament. It really hurts when you see over-aged players being selected at the expense of youngsters that dream of representing their country. Maybe if there is legislation that deals with age cheating perpetrators, it will help because if the status quo remains, then our football is doomed,” Dlomo said. Dube said he deployed Dlomo to the Ajax Hotspurs School of Soccer Excellence because he was passionate about football and understood the vision the club was pursuing. “He has achieved more than I did, winning two Division Two Championships with the second one achieved in 2018 without a defeat. He won the National Under-15 YES Games at White City by beating Harare. He also won two of the three Bulawayo City Sebenzela Tournaments and many more domestic accolades staged by Zifa Bulawayo Province,” he said. — @ZililoR