The Chronicle Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporter
HIGHLANDERS are likely to make changes to their starting line-up when they face rivals Chicken Inn in a Chibuku Super Cup tie at Barbourfields Stadium on Sunday. Both teams head into Sunday’s game after contrasting pre-season preparations, with the Gamecocks having had a seemingly flawless programme, while Highlanders finalised their squad just before the season start. While the Gamecocks have a full squad complement, Bosso have been crippled by the absence of six new signings who don’t have international clearance certificates to enable them to be register. The two sides had winning starts last weekend, with Bosso beating Bulawayo Chiefs 1-0 and the Gamecocks beating Bulawayo City 2-0.
Bosso coach Mandla Mpofu said he has a clean bill of health and they have set their sights on winning the encounter. “Preparations have so far gone well after our first game. We have an injury free squad and there are others that are managing the likes of Nqobizitha Masuku, Crispen Ncube, Divine Mhindirira and Toto Banda, who got slight knocks last week, but should be available for Sunday. They have been training since Tuesday and are looking good, unless something happens between now and Sunday they should play,” said Mpofu. “We all know Chicken Inn are a club with intentions. They have won something before and they have their best players, they have resources so, it’s not going to be easy, but as Highlanders we have to go into Sunday’s game and make sure that we win it. “We are generally happy with last week’s performance and took some positives from that game. We were under pressure in terms of dealing with crosses and we did not go forward as much as we would have wanted, but we have worked on that during the week.”
He said they were taking the games as pre-season after the club failed to secure friendlies. “For me these are pre-season games because we did not get much friendly matches, but there is that pressure to win. We will give each player who is eligible to play a chance because these are pre-season games. We might see some changes depending on what will happen, but definitely on Sunday l will make some changes to the team that played on Sunday.” — @innocentskizoe