The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
YOUTHS constitute the majority of people who have defected to Zanu-PF from opposition parties as the younger generation warms up to pro-people policies being implemented by President Mnangagwa. In the past few months, scores of opposition parties’ members have been defecting to Zanu-PF citing lack of direction and violence among other reasons, especially in the MDC Alliance. Some defectors have been threatened by their former parties for being political ‘turncoats.’ Zanu-PF acknowledges that a majority of people who have joined the party are youths and is convinced more will follow as the party continues to roll out pro-people policies and programmes introduced by President Mnangagwa. Zanu-PF acting Secretary for Youth Affairs Cde Tendai Chirau yesterday said there is huge interest generated by Vision 2030 and a myriad of programmes being implemented by Government. “There is a lot of interest from youths emanating from policies around currency stabilisation, infrastructure development, loan facilities and land which are causing youths to appreciate work being done by His Excellency President Mnangagwa. “It is because of these pro-people and pro-youth policies such as the 20 percent quota of land to youths that there is confidence in the able leadership of President Mnangagwa,” said Cde Chirau. He said the mega projects being done by Government have brought hope in youths who are getting job and business opportunities hence the younger generation is moving towards Zanu-PF. Cde Chirau said youths are beginning to understand suitability of most of the projects being done by Government and that these are real issues that can drive the economy forward and improve livelihoods. He said those that are still in opposition politics will soon realise “where home is.” “The incubation centres and innovation hubs introduced by Government have put youths in the development mantra and they feel they have a role to play in Government and economic development. “These are platforms for youths to showcase their abilities and this is what is attracting them to realise the real state of Zanu-PF manifesto hence they are joining the party that has people at heart,” added Cde Chirau. The ruling party is on a countrywide campaign to mobilise members and setting up of cells as it gears for the 2023 elections. Zanu-PF also seeks to mobilise 5 million votes for President Mnangagwa at the 2023 elections.-@ncubeleon