The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Gwanda Correspondent FIVE new irrigation schemes are set to be established in Gwanda District in Matabeleland South province as part of measures to enhance food production and curb hunger. Matabeleland South is classified under regions four and five of the country’s agricultural zones and receives little rainfall that is not adequate for effective cropping. The identified sites are Makokwe in Ward 12, Makapaka in Ward 18, Tuli-Manyange in Ward 14, Mtshazo in Ward 7 and Silikwe in Ward 3. Irrigation infrastructure development is at the heart of Government’s climate proofing interventions, which would help improve the province’s food production. Already, dilapidated infrastructure in existing infrastructure has seen capacity being reduced to about 60 percent at the province’s 78 large scale irrigations schemes and several nutrition gardens. Speaking during a recent irrigation strategy meeting, Gwanda acting district development coordinator, Mr Thulani Moyo, said developing a master plan of irrigation will help grow the district’s agriculture sector. “The master plan is crucial in the planning at district, provincial and national level and we hope the identified irrigation schemes will be set up in time while those that need rehabilitation will be attended to,” he said. “This is a crucial development for our district growth considering the rainfall patterns.” Ward 14 councillor Mr Phineas Maphosa said all irrigation schemes should be adequately equipped and adopt solar energy to enhance cost efficiency. During the meeting, 24 ward councillors in the district were tasked to identify three sites in their villages and one school for borehole drilling, old irrigation and dams that need rehabilitation, and new sites for irrigation schemes. The setting up of the irrigation schemes is in line with the National Development Strategy 1, the Government’s five-year economic blue-print spanning 2021-2025 – building towards an upper middle-income economy by 2030. The Treasury has already released about $2, 3 billion for the implementation of devolution projects in Matabeleland South province, part of which will be used to support irrigation development. – @mthabisi_mthire