The Chronicle Business Reporter
THE Minister of Environment, Climate, Tourism and Hospitality Industry, Mangaliso Ndlovu, has allayed fears over potential tourist booking cancellations due to Covid-19 quarantine regulations. Under the mandatory quarantine regulations aimed at curbing the spread of the Covid-19 pandemic, foreign visitors and non-residents without a valid PCR test are required to self-quarantine for 10 days. Similarly, returning citizens who do not have a negative 48-hour PCR test result, or show symptoms of Covid-19 on arrival, are also subjected to 10 days quarantine at a designated facility at their own expense and will be released once the Covid-19 test is negative. Minister Ndlovu admitted the measures have caused anxiety among sections of tourism players. He told players in the sector during a recent joint meeting, which was also attended by Finance and Economic Development Minister Professor Mthuli Ncube in Harare that the Government was making adjustments to the quarantine regime, which will be backed by a soon to be gazetted Statutory Instrument. “There will be some adjustment to the quarantine regime. It will be only those people coming from high-risk countries or transiting through high risk countries into the country who would be subjected to the 10-day mandatory quarantine regime,” said the minister. “So, otherwise you will just need your valid 48-hour PCR test report before departure for Zimbabwe. And when you depart for Zimbabwe, you don’t go through any other country, that is to say you don’t get your passport stamped en route, otherwise that is when we start counting our 48 hours. “There has been an outcry on this. Some have been saying they’ve received cancellations and I hope this clarifies the matter. The SI will reflect this and it will come out in the next few days.” The joint talks with tourism players were meant to address issues affecting the sector and saw ministers responding to concerns over the tourism stimulus package, loan guarantee facility, tourism industry tax breaks and the tourism revolving fund. Also in attendance were senior Government officials that include Zimbabwe Tourism Authority acting chief executive, Mr Givemore Chidzidzi, Treasury secretary Mr George Guvamatanga and his tourism counterpart, Mr Munesu Munodawafa, Tourism Business Council president Mr Wengai Nhau and other industry representatives.