The Chronicle Nqobile Tshili, Chronicle Reporter
GOVERNMENT has said 500 000 Covid-19 vaccine doses that were bought from China are expected in the country next month. The country has embarked on a Covid-19 vaccination exercise aimed at vaccinating 60 percent of the population for the country to achieve herd immunity and return to normalcy. So far more than 288 000 people have been fully vaccinated while over 630 000 have taken the first Covid-19 jab. The increase in the number of members of the public being vaccinated against Covid-19 has seen areas such as Bulawayo having a shortage of the first Covid-19 vaccine dose as Government works to restock. Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa told a post Cabinet media briefing that more vaccines are expected next month. “The Vice President and Minister of Health and Child Care, Honourable C.G.D.N. Chiwenga, apprised Cabinet on progress made in the procurement and roll-out of Covid-19 vaccines. As of 24th May, 2021, a total of 633 635 people had received their first dose of the Covid-19 vaccine and 288 437 their second dose across the country. Government continues to urge the public to go to their nearest health facility to receive their Covid-19 vaccine so that the country achieves the required herd immunity in order to control the spread of the disease,” said Minister Mutsvangwa. “Regarding vaccine procurement, the public is informed that delivery of the 500 000 Sinopharm vaccine doses which were ordered from China is expected in June 2021.” She said Government was also pleased with the management of Covid-19 cases in schools. “Concerning primary and secondary schools, Cabinet was advised that a total of 837 Covid-19-positive cases have been detected in schools since opening in March, 2021. Total recoveries in schools stand at 796, leaving the number of active cases at 39, demonstrating the effectiveness of the surveillance system and control measures in place. Of special note is the fact that all the 31 additional samples taken from learners and staff at Goldridge Primary School, Kwekwe, after the initial three positive cases previously reported, were negative,” she said. The Minister said Zimbabwe was elected into the General Committee of the World Health Assembly. “The main functions of the Assembly are to determine the policies of the World Health Organisation; to appoint the (WHO) Director-General and to supervise financial policies and to review and approve the proposed programme budget,” said the Minister. The 74th World Health Assembly commenced on May 24, 2021 and will run virtually until 1 June 2021 under the theme: “Ending this Pandemic, Preventing the Next: Building Together a Healthier, Safer and Fairer World.” Minister Mutsvangwa warned the public that the Covid-19 pandemic remains a threat to the country and citizens should adhere to prevention measures. “Cabinet would like to reiterate that the Covid-19 pandemic is still with us. While every effort is being made to safeguard all citizens from the deadly pandemic, members of the public are urged to remain vigilant and observe all the WHO protocols and national guidelines in order to ensure that we overcome this threat,” said Minister Mutsvangwa. — @nqotshili