The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter NEWLY crowned Extreme Fighting Championship (EFC) bantamweight champion Zimbabwean mixed martial arts fighter Sylvester Chipfumbu still reveling in victory, has set his sights on winning more battles. Following last Saturday’s victory when the Gweru born fighter dominated and dethroned incumbent Faeez Jacobs of South Africa for the majority of their five-round fight, which ended in a unanimous decision (48-47 50-45 49-46) at the EFC Performance Institute in Johannesburg, Chipfumbu is a man on a mission. The South Africa based Zimbabwean fighter had the luxury of giving Faeez the opportunity to stand up from their ground battle on numerous occasions, allowing him to find an opening and implement his strong striking game. Posting for the first time since becoming a champion on his social media platforms yesterday, Chipfumbu was in an ecstatic mood. “It was all a dream, I used to read Word Up! magazine .” “It has been a crazy ride with loads of uncertainties, ups and downs, twists and turns but, the vision never changed. “Shout out to everyone who sacrificed their time since day one and still believed in me through the rough patches just to see this dream become a reality. I look at this (bantamweight title victory) as one big table and everyone I’ve been with got a seat. “The best is yet to come, lots of room for improvement, more heads have to roll and more battles to be won!” Chipfumbu wrote. Chipfumbu started fighting in the EFC in 2016 and now boasts of seven wins out of nine fights. Another Zimbabwean and EFC Welterweight champion Themba Gorimbo was in Chipfumbu’s corner when he wrote his own piece of history. Gorimbo and Demarte Pena’s game plan and long hours of training helped transform Chipfumbu into the champions he became on Saturday. What made the victory sweet for Chipfumbu was his ability to defy the odds by making a remarkable comeback to the ring after last fighting in December 2019 when he beat Asiashu Tshitamba. — @ZililoR