The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
Kwekwe-based chigiyo outfit, Zig-Zag Band is back in the studio where they are working on their 13th offering. Chigiyo was last in the studio in 2013 when they released the album, Chigiyo Harder than a Rock which did not get much hype like their previous albums. Speaking on behalf of the band, Julius Ziva said they are now recording after clinching a deal with Bantu Studios that is owned by Tawanda “Bantuman” Jumo. “It feels good to be back after a while and we’re thankful to Bantu Entertainment Zimbabwe for giving us the opportunity to record. I want to set the record straight and say we never disbanded. It’s just that we never got the opportunity and funds to record due to economic hardships,” said Ziva, the group’s lead guitarist and trumpet player. He said they have songs that they have been recording and are waiting to be released. “All of us are composers so we have about 15 or so tracks that we’re set to release. Our wish is to release all of these tracks as we know our fans have been craving for our music,” Ziva said. Asked when the album would be out, Ziva said they do not want to compromise their beat by rushing to produce. “We want to ensure that we give our fans the real chigiyo sound that they’ve been missing all this while we were not recording. We’re therefore taking our time to ensure that we offer our fans the real chigiyo vibe,” he said. Jumo, popularly known by his stage name, Bantuman, said he was glad to be working with one of the finest groups in Zimbabwean music. “They’re already in the studio and we’ve successfully recorded some of the tracks. They’re also re-recording some of their old tracks and we’re looking forward to bringing back the real chigiyo music,” said Bantuman. Internationally acclaimed producer DJ Fidel and Netto are some of the producers working on the album which has the talented line up of artistes — Ziva on lead, vocals and trumpet; Gerald Chamunorwa (drums); Stephen Lunga (keys); Sunduzo Kosolo, bass and Isaac Phiri on vocals and percussion. The band was a hit in the 80s and mid-90s but after the demise of the group’s core members, the group sank into oblivion. Distance also became a barrier as some band members were based in Kadoma, Kwekwe and Harare. Gilbert Zvamaida left the group and is now the lead guitarist for Thomas Mukanya’s Blacks Unlimited. 