The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube/ Michelle Nyanzira, Chronicle Reporters
A 15-year-old Phakamani Secondary School pupil from Plumtree town drowned in a council sewage pond on Wednesday while trying to swim, Matabeleland South police have confirmed. Shaun Khuphe, a Form One pupil drowned while trying to swim in the pond with two friends who are also teenagers. The boy’s uncle who was his guardian, Mr Jika Khuphe said he was in South Africa when the incident occurred. “I was away in South Africa when I received the sad news on Wednesday that Shaun had drowned in a council sewage pond around 1.30 pm. The dam was constructed many years ago by Plumtree town council but was left unsecured,” he said. Mr Khuphe said he treated the boy as his own son since he was left in his care as a toddler when his mother relocated to South Africa in search of greener pastures. He said Shaun went to swim with his two friends leading to the fatal incident. “His friends tried in vain to rescue him when they saw him struggling to come out. They then ran to alert elders but when they came, he had already disappeared into the water. His body was retrieved the following day by the Sub Aqua Unit from Bulawayo,” said Mr Khupe. He said they are still waiting for other family members who are outside the country to arrive in Zimbabwe before they finalise burial arrangements. Mr Khuphe said if the town council does not take action to secure the water body, more children will die. Efforts to get a comment from Plumtree town council secretary Mr Dumezweni Luthe were fruitless as his phone was not answered. There was no response to questions sent on his WhatsApp. Acting Matabeleland South Police spokesperson Assistant Inspector Thabani Mkhwananzi said police attended the scene. “It is always important for elders to watch their children, especially the juveniles to avoid such tragic events. The responsible authority must also take action against such places which are a danger to the community.” he said.-@themkhust @michieroxy