The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
ZIFA sent out a questionnaire to various football stakeholders asking for their input to the constitutional review process that has been revived following a sabbatical due to the Covid-19 pandemic. The review process, Zifa said, was necessitated after realisation that the present constitution, which was last reviewed in 2013, has been overtaken by events and was now outdated. It was also felt that it had to be aligned with the Caf and Fifa constitutions. “The Zifa constitution was last amended in 2013. Since then a lot of developments have occurred in the beautiful game of football. Consequently, the Zifa constitution is now outdated and found wanting in addressing some of the emerging new concepts of the game. Zifa with the blessings of Fifa has seen it fit to establish a Constitution Review Committee with the mandate to examine the current constitution and ascertain areas that need to be amended. Accordingly, the committee is now soliciting views and opinions from all football stakeholders on the areas that need to be attended to and any new issues that need to be included in the constitution. This questionnaire is a guide to assist the stakeholders in formulating their views. “All stakeholders are advised that they are free to express their views in any manner they are comfortable with. We kindly request your participation in this research. Your answers will be used for the sole purposes of this research,” wrote Zifa on the questionnaire. Some of the new amendments that may be included in the draft document are the inclusion of the Footballers Union of Zimbabwe as delegates to the Zifa assembly. There is also the issue of the number of Premier Soccer League teams, which presently stand at 16, yet there are 18 PSL teams. The review committee is chaired by Kelvin Musimwa who is deputised by Thomas Marambanyika. Other members of the committee are Gilbert Saika, Wisdom Simba, Mehluli Thebe, Beaulah Musarah, Isaiah Mupfurutsa and Simon Simango.