The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma and Raymond Jaravaza, Showbiz Correspondents
Joseph Dzavo who runs the popular “KoChigumira” Tshisa Nyama in Bulawayo’s Luveve suburb is a man on a mission as he intends to set up similar open-air spots around the city. Matsika Tshisa Nyama, which has been running for a couple of years has been dubbed the ultimate venue for a township experience by most outdoor entertainment lovers who are spoilt for choice. To realise his dream, Dzavo has turned to the low-density suburb of Queens Park at the iconic Zimbabwe Saints Sports Club which has been a white elephant for years. Despite its popularity as the home of “Chauya Chikwata” — the moniker given to the Zimbabwe Saints Football Club, this place has been defunct. A visit to the Zimbabwe Saints Sports Club a few years back by the Saturday Leisure team painted a picture of a place that was in dire need of a major revamp with dilapidated ablution facilities, falling ceilings in some sections of the facility and outdoor lawn that had clearly not received a drop of water for some time. But all that is changing with the coming in of Dzavo, whose mission is to give the Zimbabwe Saints Sports Club, a new lease of life that will draw outdoor entertainment lovers from across the city. The place is being renovated with security features being upgraded. A lawn has been planted too. Dzavo said he wants to turn the place into a booming outdoor joint that will lure people. He said he is also doing this in appreciation of the ZimBHO — Zimbabwe A World of Wonders initiative, a domestic tourism campaign by the Zimbabwe Tourism Authority that encourages locals to visit and enjoy local tourist sites. “I’ve opened a butchery and restaurant with the ultimate goal being to turn the Zimbabwe Saints Sports Club into a tshisa nyama that will attract people from all walks of life from across the city. The venue is also set to attract people from outside Bulawayo who want to experience the great hospitality of our beautiful city. “For now, we’re following the Covid-19 regulations and are only operating at 50 percent capacity, but we’re not being deterred by that because we know that with time, the authorities will eventually allow businesses like ours to operate at full capacity when the Covid-19 pandemic threat is over,” said Dzavo. The new joint was opened last week and Dzavo said he has given locals another venue to unwind during weekends while enjoying their meat and drinks. He said by opening this joint and many others he hopes to open in the near future, he wants to make Bulawayo great again while also creating much-needed employment for locals. “We’ve employed local people who’re eager to show the greatness of the city through the eatery and leisure business. All we want is to make Bulawayo great again. Tshisa nyama joints are good in that they are a place where people can unwind after a long day at work and they also form part of local tourist sites for visitors,” said Dzavo. When lockdown measures are further eased, Dzavo said he will take the opportunity to also promote local artistes who will showcase their talent at the venue. “With time, we hope the joint will also be home to local artistes who will come and showcase their talent as we’re also in a drive to promote the creative sector,” he said. The rebirth of the Zimbabwe Saints Sports Club is coinciding with the bouncing back of Chauya Chikwata, the once great Bulawayo footbal club. The chairman of Zimbabwe Saints FC Vincent Pamire has welcomed the revamping of the sports club. “Zimbabwe Saints Football Club is back in the Zifa Southern Region league after years in the wilderness as we seek to bring back to life, the once-great football club that was loved by many — young and old. “I’m glad that a local businessman has taken it upon himself to revamp the sports club, giving our fans a place to unwind and have drinks after watching their team play in Division One,” said Pamire. The football rivalry between Zimbabwe Saints and Highlanders — both teams that hail from Bulawayo and used to command huge following, was very intense. — @mthabisi_mthire/ @RaymondJaravaza.