The Chronicle Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter SOME Highlanders members and supporters met at the club house on Sunday to form a Greater Bulawayo Highlanders Supporters Chapter in a controversy filled afternoon. The meeting was held at the same time  and place with that of the popular Heart and Soul Supporters Chapter. In an interview, interim chairman of the Greater Bulawayo Supporters Chapter Themba Mhlophe said they had the blessings of the club yet club executive committee member Mgcini Mafu chose to attend the Heart and Soul meeting. There are claims that the Bulawayo Supporters Chapter is a project funded by a losing candidate in the March Highlanders elections, but Mhlophe rubbished those claims. “We are not someone’s project, we are just a group of staunch Highlanders members and supporters whose interest is to push the Bosso agenda, nothing more, nothing less,” said Mhlophe, a renowned athletics coach and administrator. He said they will soon draft a working document to direct their operations. “Look we formed this chapter after the realisation that we have too many supporters’ chapters in Bulawayo which wasn’t potraying a good picture of this great institution. We believe one united and big chapter in Bulawayo is the way to go. We will soon be rolling out our programmes as a chapter,” said Mhlophe. Two weeks ago a meeting was held at the club house with the sole aim of establishing a single supporters’ chapter, but the group failed to reach a consensus, mainly on the name, as some felt that Heart and Soul should be the main name while others, mostly former members of  Heart and Soul, said a new name was the way to go. Heart and Soul was formed in 2011. Mhlophe leads a four-member interim committee and is deputised by Fisinolia Dube, while Pauline Ncube is the interim secretary-general and Never Phiri is the committee member. “We did not elect a treasurer because we are still an interim and are yet to have financial books. In three months when we have drafted our constitution, we will then choose a treasurer,” said Mhlophe.