The Chronicle  Sikhumbuzo Moyo, Senior Sports Reporter
THE Sports and Recreation Commission has asked the Zimbabwe Netball Association Bulawayo province to furnish it with details on the hosting of an Africa Day mini-tournament at Sobukhazi High School on Tuesday. SRC provincial coordinator for Bulawayo Metropolitan province Sam Dzvimbu said the report must be submitted within seven days. The tournament was held generally without adherence to Covid-19 guidelines and clearance from the SRC and was also staged at a school despite public gatherings being banned in schools. In a letter to Zina Bulawayo, which was also copied to Zina national secretary-general, Dzvimbu expressed the SRC’s concern at the lack of observation of Covid-19 regulations during the tournament. Referenced ‘Request for clarity on Hope through Sport and Sports Grind Africa Day Mini Tournament held at Sobhukazi High School on 25 May 2021,’ Dzvimbu said Zina Bulawayo must the report must include all documentation related to the tournament. “May you furnish Sports and Recreation Commission Bulawayo Province within 7 days a report with the following information: SRC clearance to the above event, details of the event organisers, role of Zina Bulawayo province in this tournament as Zina Bulawayo Province secretary-general was present at the event, provide police clearance to the event,” wrote Dzimbu. Zina Bulawayo province secretary-general Livonia Bhebhe told Chronicle Sport on the sidelines of the tournament that her organisation was not involved and Zina members were just there in their personal capacities. This was despite the fact that it was her office that picked the teams after being contacted by the sponsors. The tournament venue was also secured by her office. Dzvimbu also warned those that have been organising sporting events in various suburbs in the city that law enforcement agencies will be on the lookout and will descend on them. “To many unsanctioned sporting events, those remain illegal and once that is brought to us, we forward such cases to law enforcers and so far, they have been very cooperative,” said Dzvimbu.