The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
Fast-growing national broadcaster, Zimbabwe Television Network (ZTN) has expressed confidence in the Matabeleland region’s acting talent after they recorded a high turnout for auditions on Tuesday for a forthcoming television series. The auditions for the cast of the unnamed series were conducted in Bulawayo where ZTN was targeting actors fluent isiNdebele, aged between 25 and 60. ZTN features director, Tendai “Sokostina” Garwe, who was part of the scouting team, said they were happy with the turnout and rich talent the region is endowed with. She said the selection process will be done in the coming fortnight with the large chunk of the cast set to be drawn from Filabusi, where the series will be shot. “There was a high turnout of amazing talent. The selection process will be done within two weeks to cast the leads. We’re yet to travel to Filabusi to find the rest of the cast. “Once this process has been completed, we’ll have a cast of about 100, but the leads are 10 and those are the ones we’ll take from Bulawayo. The rest will be cast from Filabusi,” said Sokostina. She said the TV station has been left between a rock and a hard place in terms of shortlisting the actors due to the immense talent showcased at the auditions at Amakhosi Theatre. “The Matabeleland region is very talented and we’re really going to have a difficult time casting because they (hopefuls) were really good. This is very exciting and encouraging for the growth of our country’s film industry,” said Sokostina. Those who fail to make it for this series, Sokostina said, should not lose hope, but instead work on fine-tuning their art as ZTN will be rolling out more shows in the region. “Those that won’t be cast shouldn’t lose hope because there’ll more shows to come from ZTN. The Matabeleland region at large is ripe for the picking, without a doubt.” The TV series is expected to be filmed in the rural areas of Insiza district in Filabusi during the winter season. ZTN, which has been leading the way in terms of quality productions, wants to have a wider reach in its storytelling prowess hence its decision to have productions from Matabeleland. — @mthabisi_mthire.