The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Chronicle Reporter
Bulawayo City Council yesterday confirmed that it disconnected water at the Bulawayo Polytechnic over a month ago, amid revelations by council sources that the institution owes $4,5 million. Hundreds of students who are writing examinations are resorting to buying bottled water to drink as the borehole water is said to be unsafe for drinking. The students and staff are using buckets to carry borehole water to flush the toilets. In response to questions yesterday, council corporate communications manager Mrs Nesisa Mpofu said: “Bulawayo Polytechnic was cut off for non-payment. We, unfortunately, cannot advise how much they owe as that is confidential information between Bulawayo City Council and its client. You may wish to check with Bulawayo Polytechnic on how much they owe.” However, sources within the local authority said the academic institution owes $4,5 million in water arrears. Higher and Tertiary Education, Science and Technology Development Professor Amon Murwira yesterday said his office will ensure that the Bulawayo Polytechnic clears its arrears. “It is the Government which is owing BCC and our policy is that we pay, it’s just a matter of time. The most important thing is that our institutions have boreholes. There is no one who has measured or tested that the water is contaminated because we need to be factual in handling these issues,” said Prof Murwira. “We always pay our debts and I know that something is going to be done about this issue as per our policy which says when we owe, we pay. We may resort to using a payment plan if we cannot afford the whole amount at once, but we will pay.” Prof Murwira added that it was important for staff members and students to understand that water challenges affect everyone in Zimbabwe. “We have sunk boreholes at all our institutions, so there is balance because if we consider raising fees so that we clear the debt we will have a huge outcry,” he said. Contacted for comment, the Bulawayo provincial Environmental Management Agency manager Mrs Sithembisiwe Ndlovu said so far there was no evidence to prove that borehole water at the Bulawayo Polytechnic is unsafe. “For now, we cannot really say anything pertaining to the condition of the borehole water from Poly because no tests have been carried to prove that it is contaminated. We will therefore get some samples during our routine checks on all boreholes and establish if there is an anomaly. It is only then when we can take measures to investigate who may be polluting the water among other things,” said Mrs Ndlovu. Bulawayo Polytechnic principal, Engineer Gilbert Mabasa told Chronicle that it was not true that there was no water because there were several boreholes at the college. He said it was normal for the institution to have arrears just like every citizen in Zimbabwe. Eng Mabasa said the water challenges were a nationwide problem hence there was no need to amplify Bulawayo Polytechnic’s challenges. “Someone is trying to make up a story, we have our water supplies and I don’t know what the problem is. Dirty water has nothing to do with having a water problem and there are people who have always been proud who prefer buying drinking water,” said Eng Mabasa. — @thamamoe