The Chronicle Bongani Ndlovu, Showbiz Correspondent Artistes and media practitioners can now register with the National Arts Council of Zimbabwe (NACZ) to access discounted medical services and products under the Medical facility for artistes. To register, artists require certified copies of their identity documents and birth certificates for their children. Registration is to be approved within 72 hours after all information supplied has been verified and a confirmation letter is provided to the artists by the NACZ provincial offices. The facility that was pioneered in Bulawayo by Comedian Dumisani “MaForty” Ndlovu is now available in Harare, Mutare, Gweru and Gwanda and seeks to assist Zimbabwean artistes from all facets of the creative industry to access health services and products at discounted rates. According to Maforty, different service providers in the towns have come on board to offer products and services to artists at reduced rates and prices. The latest practice to join the scheme is Westview Clinics owned by a prominent medical practitioner, music promoter and Philanthropist Dr Johannes Marisa in Harare “We have been negotiating with medical practitioners, pharmacies and laboratories so that artists can access consultation services, drugs and laboratory test at discounted prices and I am happy that we have found cooperating partners in Harare, Mutare, Gweru and Gwanda”, he said. The facility has expanded to include the spouses and children of artistes who are less than 18 years old for services accessed in Bulawayo, Gweru, Gwanda and Mutare. “To access the facilities, artistes have to register for the scheme with the NACZ provincial offices in the towns. I’m happy that to date over 30 artistes have registered in Bulawayo and we hope with the increased number of service providers we can have more artistes coming on board to enjoy the services,” MaForty said. Dr Marisa said he was pleased to be part of the scheme which is an extension of his previous work of helping artistes access medical care through his clinics and other members of the Medical and Dental Private Practitioners Association of Zimbabwe (MDPPZA). “I’m coming on board to offer such services at a discounted rate to bonafide registered artists. Local artists have become part of my family and it has always been my desire (resources permitting) to do more to promote and preserve their legacy” he said. MaForty also revealed that Arts Journalists can also register under the same facility and they only need a letter from their respective Editors and a valid press card to be able to benefit from the scheme. “Registration for the facility is free and ongoing allowing artists to register at any time for their convenience,” he said. Service Providers for the facility include, in Bulawayo, 9th Avenue Surgery, No. 33, 9th Ave and Herbert Chitepo St. Vitamind Pharmacy Shop No. 1 Mays Building Cnr 12th and Fife Street. Medix Daenite Pharmacy, Shop 1 Nola Building 84 Robert Mugabe Way and Procare Clinical Laboratories No. 1 Maureen Court, 4th Ave, Between J Moyo and J. M. N Nkomo Street. Harare, Marimba Medical Center Unit 4 Samora Machel, Shopping Centre, Samora Machel Avenue West. Chest Medical Stand No. 84 Tafara Way Mabvuku. Westview Clinic Stand 6841 Zimre Park Ruwa and Stand 1820, 231st Kuwadzana 2. Westview Maternity 10481 Kuwadzana 2. Medical and Travel Clinic 16 Josiah Tongogara cnr Harare Street. Medix pharmacies in Mabelreign, Borrowdale, Highlands and Mt Pleasant. Mutare, Uptown Family Clinic 1st Floor Msasa House, 107 Herbert Chitepo Street and Medix Lancasters 95 A Herbert Chitepo Street, Mutare. Gweru, School Avenue Medical Centre 3 School Avenue and Apex Pharmacy, Shop 3 Elizabeth Mansions 65 6th Street R. G Mugabe Way Gweru. Gwanda, Dr S Gororo Maternity And Gynecology Clinic 1st Floor, NSSA Complex, Gwanda.