The Chronicle Leonard Ncube, Victoria Falls Reporter
FORMER National Patriotic Front provincial youth chairman for Matabeleland North Cde Njabulo Sibanda who recently joined Zanu-PF says he has become a target of attack by unnamed members of his former party who accuse him of being a political turncoat. Cde Sibanda contested the Lupane East Constituency seat which was won by Zanu-PF in the 2018 harmonised elections. NPF and MDC Alliance merged to contest the 2018 elections. Cde Sibanda said his decision to join the ruling party was independent and was motivated by the fact that Zanu-PF has clear development policies. “My decision has nothing to do with positions or money but was motivated by the desire to join comrades that are fighting for a better Zimbabwe. Zanu-PF is striving to better the lives of all Zimbabweans hence its a party of choice in the rural areas where I come from,” said Sibanda. He said there were some people especially in MDC Alliance who felt he betrayed them and were now accusing him of being a political turncoat. “My political participation has been influenced by the plight of the masses which is the reason why I have been at the forefront of community projects,” said Cde Sibanda. He said his attackers were faceless characters on social media. Cde Sibanda said he decided to join Zanu-PF because he was for development and has been working with Matabeleland North Provincial Affairs and Devolution Minister Richard Moyo on development projects in Lupane. Some of the projects include building Daluka and Gandangula bridges as well as reconnecting electricity to Gandangula Primary School. Cde Sibanda said he had informed Zanu-PF leadership in Lupane about the threats to his life. He said political rivals should know that in politics people do not make permanent friends or enemies but should be united by development. Cde Sibanda said it is time for Zimbabweans to rally behind a party that works with the grassroots to improve the welfare of the people. Chairperson for Zanu-PF Lupane District Coordinating Committee Cde Permanent Sibanda said people who attack other citizens for making political decisions are violating other people’s rights and should be be exposed. Zanu-PF is on a membership mobilisation drive targeting to mobilise five million voters by 2023.-@ncubeleon