The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
AILING boxing trainer Philip ‘Striker’ Ndlovu has been described as a father figure, role model and community champion, who should be helped at his time of need instead of waiting to eulogise him when he is gone. Ndlovu is suffering from stage five prostate cancer and is now being prescribed medication just to ease the pain. Ndlovu (66) was first diagnosed with prostate cancer at the beginning of last year and his condition deteriorated rapidly, leaving him bedridden after he failed to raise US$3 000 required to undergo a trans-urethral resection of the prostate (Turp) procedure to remove parts of the prostate that are pressing on the urethra, to make it easier to pass urine. He is literally confined to a bed in his one room at Ejingeni Flats in Makokoba and is now reliant on the benevolence of his neighbours and friends for everything since he can’t do anything for himself. Football legend and Bulawayo City FC vice-chairman Zenzo Moyo, who has known Striker since his early childhood, said the boxing trainer “touched” a lot of lives in Makokoba and it was sad to see him helpless with hardly any help. Moyo grew up with his maternal grandmother at Ejingeni Flats, next door to Ndlovu, and the former Highlanders and national team forward’s brother Mandlenkosi, who still stays at the same flat, has been assisting the bedridden coach by cleaning his room and taking him outside for some sunshine. “The problem we have as a society is that we tend to celebrate our heroes when they are dead. Very little is done to celebrate or honour people that have brought positive influence to our communities. The story of Makokoba is well known; it’s a suburb that some associate with crime and hardship. In the midst of all those hardships, there are people like Striker, who dedicated themselves to changing lives of youngsters by taking them off the streets through his coaching,” said Moyo. “He was a coach and father figure to most of us, and my challenge, especially to the people of Makokoba, whom Striker directly influenced on a daily basis, is that let’s take care of our own. There’s no better way of celebrating him and showing him our appreciation than no when he needs us most,” he said. The former Zimbabwe international has been periodically providing Ndlovu with foodstuffs and money for hospital charges and medication. In his prime, Ndlovu identified and trained a number of Bulawayo boxers, who include former World Boxing Association (WBA) Pan African heavyweight champion Thamsanqa Dube and ex-World Boxing Federation (WBF) Africa heavyweight title holder Elvis ‘Bulawayo Bomber’ Moyo. An influential figure in Zimbabwean boxing circles in the last 30 years, many great boxers have come out of Tshaka Youth Centre where Ndlovu was the resident coach. Former champions Jabulani Gombiro, Nokuthula Tshabangu, Ambrose Mlilo, Sipho Moyo, Fredrick Chisoro and Modercai Donga all passed through Ndlovu’s hands. Tshabangu went on to have a professional record of seven wins and nine losses from 1993 to 2003. His losses included a second-round knockout by Jason Booth in Nottingham, England, for the Commonwealth Flyweight Title on February 16, 2001. Tshabangu represented the country in the flyweight division in the 1988 Seoul Olympics. In his first-round bout, he defeated Bonifacio Garcia of Spain before losing to Kim Kwang-sun of South Korea in his second fight. He won a silver medal at the 1990 Commonwealth Games in the flyweight division, losing in the final to Wayne McCullough of Northern Ireland. Donga, who also won a number of titles while training under Ndlovu, has also appealed for urgent assistance for Ndlovu. “Good morning boxing family. I am making an SOS call for my former coach Philip Striker. As some of you may be aware, Striker has been diagnosed with cancer of the prostate and is in need of help in a lot of things. The family and I have been trying the best we can under the circumstances, but we are calling for an extended hand from the boxing family. Please put in whatever you can. We are calling for contributions of whatever kind. Those who can send Ecocash, please use Sikhangezile Ndlovu (Striker’s niece)’s number 0772674159. We will publicly share the list of people that have contributed and the amounts,” Donga wrote on his Facebook timeline. South African-based Bulawayo Bomber is coordinating fundraising initiatives in that country. “I’ve been trying to coordinate with some of the guys that were trained by Striker so that we can assist. Those in South Africa who wish to assist can contact me or call Sikhangezile Ndlovu. “This is a man who assisted me when I was a novice and encouraged me to take boxing seriously. He saw the potential in me and for that I’ll forever be grateful,” said Elvis. Chicken Inn secretary Tawengwa Hara shared a video of himself being trained by Ndlovu. Hara was part of the people that took up white-collar boxing classes provided by Ndlovu for fitness purposes. “I’ve been missing my training sessions with coach Striker and had hoped that he was on recovery course. A group of white-collar boxers has been created to raise whatever we can to assist him. Thanks to Chronicle Sport for bringing his condition to the fore because we truly didn’t know that his condition had deteriorated,” said Hara. Bulawayo deputy mayor Mlandu Ncube appealed to the community to assist Ndlovu. “Coach Philip Striker’s works are there for everyone to see. As a community we should learn to appreciate each other in times like these because someone spends his time when he is still able, assisting the community. But when the person is down, the community must pay back and assist the person,” said Ncube. The Sports Journalists Association (Spoja) Southern Region was also touched by Ndlovu’s condition. “We have come on board in a mission to get our coach back in the ring. We have always sung his praises for his sacrifices in the sport and we continue to do what we want to do with all legends that they should be honoured while still alive. “We managed to raise $10 000, R200 and US$205 in 18 hours after discussing Striker’s condition in our (social media) groups after reading about him in Chronicle Sport,” said Lovemore Dube, Spoja SR chairperson. — @ZililoR