The Chronicle ASSOCIATION of National Olympic Committees of Africa (ANOCA) president Mustapha Berraf has been accused of breaching the organisation’s ethics rules ahead of the presidential election. Lydia Nsekera, who is the only candidate to stand against Berraf in tomorrow’s vote, claims the Algerian attempted to “discredit” her and used “unacceptable” tactics to try to “gain the sympathy of voting members” in recent days. The allegations were made in a communication, seen by insidethegames, which is addressed to the chairman and members of the ANOCA Ethics Commission. The ANOCA General Assembly started yesterday in Egyptian capital Cairo where Nsekera is hoping to unseat Berraf who has been in charge of the organisation since 2018. Berraf is seeking a second four-year term in office, but Nsekera has attacked her rival’s re-election campaign. “The ANOCA Ethics Commission provided us clear guidelines for the management of our campaign,” Nsekera wrote. “However, everyone of us has observed for some time how president Mustapha Berraf has multiplied last minute activities during a campaign period, which according to the rules should not be condoned. “First of all, president Berraf decided to publish the strategic plan developed by representatives of our NOCs [National Olympic Committees] for the next quadrennial as his campaign document. “As managers, we all know that such a document will be implemented by the team that will be elected on May 25. “President Berraf further gave an interview published by RFI on April 18 in which I read an attempt to discredit my person. “We are in a democracy, and when things are not working as they should, especially when the reputation of our Institution is threatened, dragged through the mud for now two years because of its leaders, as responsible men and women, it is our duty to stand up and demand change. “None of us wants to continue to see ANOCA ridiculed in public like it is presently the case. “Furthermore, the publicity regarding the construction of headquarters for the benefit of African NOCs has become a campaign tool used by president Berraf in recent times to try to gain the sympathy of the voters. “This project is an ANOCA project, which will be studied, submitted for Members’ approval and implemented by the team that will be elected to lead ANOCA. “This project should in no way be used as a campaign instrument. “ANOCA funds belong to the NOCs and we are doing them no favour by rendering them the services they are entitled to.” Nsekera insisted she “will not engage in a campaign of slander or manipulation” and underlined a goal of “restoring the image and reputation” of ANOCA. However, the Burundi National Olympic Committee president stressed the importance of drawing attention to Berraf’s “unacceptable” activities to the Ethics Commission and said she hoped “our sense of responsibility will take precedence over our own interests”. It is the second time Nsekera has stood for the ANOCA presidency, having lost out by 34 votes to 20 to Berraf in the second round of voting in 2018. Nsekera, who would become the first woman to lead a continental group of NOCs should she be elected president, has vowed to improve ANOCA’s governance. Her manifesto pledged to deliver an “appropriate management system, anchored on transparency, trust, mutual respects, focused on the well-being of our athletes and our NOCs”. Nsekera’s promises include improving communication to guarantee transparency across Africa and collaboration with the Games Commission to make the African Games, the African Youth Games and the ANOCA Beach Games more profitable. Nsekera also vouches for inclusion of women, people with disabilities and other minorities, as well as a focus on youth development to improve future generations of athletes. The ANOCA General Assembly is being hosted by the Egyptian Olympic Committee. — Inside the Games