The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
ZIMBABWE is intensifying its preparations for the Expo Dubai, a global trade exhibition to be held in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) starting this year. The country’s stand has already been designed while the event organisers are fitting the pavilion. The event which was supposed to be held from October 2020 to April 2021 was moved due to the outbreak of Covid-19. The event will now be held from October this year to 31 March 2022 and Zimbabwe expects to ride on the forum to market its investment opportunities and seal mutual trade ties with international investors. In a post-Cabinet briefing on Tuesday, Information, Publicity and Broadcasting Services Minister Monica Mutsvangwa said participating at Expo 2020 was critical to the country’s engagement and re-engagement drive. “The objectives of Zimbabwe’s participation at Expo 2020 are as follows: to promote Zimbabwe’s engagement, re-engagement and image building agenda and unpack the country’s Vision 2030,” she said. “. . . to promote investment opportunities in Zimbabwe and attract investors in various sectors including mining, agriculture, manufacturing and infrastructure development and to promote trade opportunities for Zimbabwe and seek export markets for agriculture (notably horticulture) and mineral commodities, and other manufactured products in the Middle East.” At the Expo, the country also seeks to showcase its rich cultural heritage and tourist attractions to the United Arab Emirates, Middle East and the rest of the world as well as promoting its tourist destinations. The Expo will run under the theme “Connecting Minds, Creating the Future”. Minister Mutsvangwa said three sub-themes for the event form the pillars around, which countries, companies and industries would amplify their exhibitions. These are; “Opportunity”; “Mobility” and “Sustainability”. The promotional activities that will be showcased include retail store, the world market kiosk, culinary experiences, fashion, arts and culture, thematic business forums and women’s pavilion. “Zimbabwe will participate and exhibit under the opportunity sub-theme cluster, emphasising the business opportunities, new industries, employment, financial, governance and education opportunities available,”said Minister Mutsvangwa. The country’s theme statement is “Zimbabwe-the Land of a Great People”, which will showcase the vision, people and the “Zimbabwe is open for business” mantra. On progress made to date, Minister Mutsvangwa said the country’s stand has been designed and expo organisers were in the process of fitting the pavilion. “Government wishes to highlight that the National Day for Zimbabwe at Expo 2020 Dubai will be March 14, 2022 and that His Excellency the President (Mnangagwa) is expected to officiate at the event,” she said. “Meanwhile, the mobilisation of companies in various niche areas to participate continues. Going forward, the nation will be advised of developments in preparations for the Expo through frequent updates,” she said. In the meantime, Cabinet has agreed to set up an Inter-Ministerial Committee, which includes private-sector representatives to accelerate preparations for the country’s participation. “Cabinet also appreciates that the Expo is important for re-engagement, expanding exports market as well as developing the local market. “In that connection, the Government takes this opportunity to advise that it has export development tax incentives in place for export-oriented initiatives, in particular, a lucrative tax rebate for exports,” said Minister Mutsvangwa. — @okazunga.