The Chronicle CHELSEA manager Thomas Tuchel said yesterday his side can approach this weekend’s Champions League final against Manchester City with confidence after recent victories against Pep Guardiola’s Premier League winners. The Blues will face City in Porto on Saturday after securing a top-four finish in the English top-flight despite a 2-1 defeat at Aston Villa. Tuchel outfoxed Guardiola in last month’s FA Cup semifinal before inflicting a rare home league defeat on City but his side have lost three of their past four games in all competitions. The German, who replaced Frank Lampard in January, said reaching the top four after Sunday’s loss at Villa Park was an “outstanding achievement” and his players were now having a short mental break. “I want them to be here on Wednesday full of joy because this is maybe one of their most exciting weeks in their whole life as professional players,” he said. Tuchel, whose Paris Saint-German side were beaten last year by Bayern Munich in the Champions League final, said the recent victories against City had proved they were beatable. “I think it helped us to bond, to grow and to arrive with a lot of self-confidence,” he said. “Manchester City are the benchmark. They are the champions. “They are the benchmark in Europe and in this league and we are the guys who want to hunt them and want to close the gap.” “The experience helped,” he added. “It gives you not an advantage but it helps us to arrive with confidence, to be well aware of what is needed to have a chance to beat them.” Tuchel said he was worried his side had lost three of their past four matches in all competitions, including the FA Cup final against Leicester, but said they were playing well. “It concerns me because it always concerns me when we lose and this is not so easy to get a grip on these losses because the data we produce, the statistics we produce, the performances we produce, do not indicate that it’s necessary or even logical to lose,” he said. “We simply have not been lucky enough in these games. We maybe didn’t push it too much or whatever and we’re looking for reasons but we cannot deny we had good performances,” he added. Tuchel said goalkeeper Edouard Mendy had shown “huge improvement” in his battle to be fit for the final in Porto after suffering a rib injury following a collision with the post in the Villa defeat. “He’s made a huge improvement in the management of pain,” said the Chelsea boss. “So we need a further update on Wednesday but we hope to have him back in training.” — SuperSport