The Chronicle Leonard Ncube in Binga
BINGA villagers are using focus group discussions and talk shows to raise awareness against early sexual engagements by young people resulting in high teenage pregnancy rates and school drop-outs. Basilwizi Trust, a non-governmental organisation operating in Binga piloted the sessions in Lubanda, Saba, Siachilaba and Sianzyundu wards targeting a cross section of the community including elderly and young people. This is part of a three-year sexual reproductive health and rights programme ‘Partnership for Social Accountability and Alliance ‘being undertaken in partnership with SafAids and Action Aid. Members of the community gather and discuss selected issues as prevalence of teenage pregnancies, school drop-outs and abuse among others and proffer possible solutions together. On Wednesday, participants at Sianzyundu Clinic in Ward 9 expressed concern over prevalence of teenage pregnancies and school drop-outs in Binga attributed this to youths rushing to engage in sexual activities. Participants said young people also risk contracting sexually transmitted infections, hence they should be taught about sexual reproductive health and rights so that they make informed decisions. Some blamed wayward behaviour on the new competency based education curriculum saying it is morally wrong for kids to be taught reproductive health processes in primary school, and urged Government to change the curriculum. Sexual reproductive health learning should start at the age of 16, some parents said.
There were mixed feelings on contraceptives such as family planning pills and condoms being given to young people. Some said contraceptives have side effects and giving them to young people also drives them into immorality, while others recommended them to protect youths who also should be taught about safe sex. Parents were implored to revert to old ways of teaching their children while others bemoaned demise of the extended family structure where aunties and uncles are no longer there to advise their nephews and nieces. Ms Isabel Chasombwa (19), a former Binga High School pupil called for urgent action to prevent young people from engaging in early sex as many end up dropping out of school. “It’s true that a lot of young people are engaging in bush sex. Some misbehave taking advantage of absence of parents and we know of many that have gotten pregnant before 16 years and others have even dropped out of school. “This talk show has been helpful because we have been taught about upholding values and morals and abstaining from sex. We now know that there are side effects in using contraceptives as that can affect fertility for those who have never given birth,” said Ms Chasombwa. Vice chairperson of Health Centre Committee (HCC) which is made up of village health workers in the targeted community, Ms Selina Munsaka said the talk shows will go a long way in capacitating the community and fighting health and social challenges. “We have been equipped with knowledge as HCC workers and now we can intensify our activities around schools to raise awareness,” she said. Assemblies of God Pastor David Mudimba blamed children’s immorality on parents’ failure to teach them values. “As church we teach abstinence as prescribed in the Bible but as parents we are lacking. Some parents do nothing when their children misbehave yet we should rebuke any child so they uphold our values. Contraceptives are not good for children as they promote immorality. We send children to school to learn and we expect them to concentrate on education and not misbehave,” said Pastor Mudimba.
Meempa village head Mr Simon Jack bemoaned abuse of young people by some adults who he said use money to get legal representation and return to the community and continue with their lives as if nothing happened. “We are worried as community leaders and want such people to pay for their sins. This activity is a teaching platform for youths and will help people understand,” he said. Binga ward 9 Councillor Lamion Munkuli said girl child issues should be included in local authorities’ budgets. Basilwizi programmes manager Mrs Danisa Mudimba said the talk shows and group discussions were necessitated by a realisation that there is an information gap, hence the need to encourage dialogue between children and parents. “What we have learnt here is that parents are not prepared to accept that children need protection but at the same time they are admitting that young people are now sexually active and getting pregnant at an early stage,” she said.— @ncubeleon