The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent
THE Redcliff Municipality has reduced rates by 25 percent at a time when many councils have increased their charges and hopes this would stimulate ratepayers to honour their bills and boost the local authority’s coffers. The new rates apply to all services ranging from water and sewer, commercial properties, light and heavy industries, flats, stands and fixed water charge, which has been slashed by up to 50 percent. The council has also credited ratepayers’ accounts for being overcharged for water between December 2020 and March 2021 and the total amount is $2,8 million. In a bid to ensure that ratepayers pay council dues, the council will also install 10 000 prepaid water meters across the town and the project will be done in phases. Redcliff Mayor, Councillor Clayton Masiyatsva, said the interventions were meant to encourage ratepayers to pay their rates as well as attract investment. “Council resolved to reduce rates by 25 percent. We have also reduced our fixed water charges and this is until the water supply situation improves. Council has also resolved to reduce tariffs to attract investors,” he said. The local authority has contracted a local company to do road repairs in suburbs like Rutendo, Simbi Park, Torwood and Millenium Park. The council has also unveiled 200 high density stands in Rutendo Extension and plots in Ridgeway. Clr Masiyatsva said council has also resolved to scrap public lighting levies for residents whose areas are yet to be connected. New suburbs like Renin Park, Millennium Park, Engelbert, Garikai, Rutendo Extension, Simbi Park and Stone Clare are yet to be electrified. The move by the local authority comes at a time when the town is reeling under a $40 million water debt to Kwekwe City, which supplies the local authority with water. Redcliff which is working on moving its Central Business District to the Harare-Bulawayo Highway, is also targeting to become a city by 2030. Following the demise of Ziscosteel almost a decade ago, economic activity has been low in the town and the interventions are expected to bring in new investors.