The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
PRESIDENT Mnangagwa has said the Second Republic is going to unveil a statue for revered military tactician, General Mtshana Khumalo. President Mnangagwa said the statue of the iconic and celebrated Zimbabwean heroine Mbuya Nehanda is set to be unveiled on May 25. The President revealed this as he launched the Culture Week commemorations at Chief Njelele’s homestead in Gokwe South district on Friday. He said the Second Republic will honour all the country’s heroes who sacrificed with their lives for the country’s independence. Gen Khumalo was the commander of King Lobengula’s Imbizo Regiment that defeated the colonialist Allan Wilson Patrol at the Battle of Pupu on December 4, in 1893 as the first shots of resistance against colonialism were fired. Wilson, the loser, was honoured by the settler regime and the legacy is there for all to see but, Gen Khumalo, the victor had not. Now, the Government has honoured Gen Khumalo for his role in fighting colonialism. During last year’s Heroes’ Day virtual address, President Mnangagwa announced that Gen Khumalo had been honoured alongside Queen Lozikeyi, Mgandani Dlodlo and Mbuya Nehanda whose statue is being erected in Harare. He said the list of the country’s monuments was being reviewed to include the Pupu Liberation War Shrine, among others. Already, Government has started upgrading Pupu site in Lupane into a national museum with work set to be completed before the end of the year. Located about 50km east of Lupane Centre, Pupu is where King Lobengula’s warriors killed 32 of 33 colonial forces led by Major Allan Wilson in 1893. There have been concerns about neglect of the place despite its rich history of the Ndebele people. Locals want the shrine developed into a monument like the Great Zimbabwe monument. “Today (Friday) we have Chief Khumalo with us, he is the great great-grand child of Gen Khumalo. Gen Khumalo was fighting for King Lobengula and they defeated a regiment that was led by Allan Wilson during the Battle of Pupu. We honoured Chief Khumalo’s grandfather posthumously and we are going to have a statue in his honour. “On May 25, we are unveiling Mbuya Nehanda statue in Harare and we are going to do the same for Gen Khumalo and all the other heroes and heroines of the country,” said President Mnangagwa. He said the colonisers built a church at a place where there was a well where Mbuya Nehanda used to fetch water to drink. President Mnangagwa said the Government has now constructed a statue near the church. “On May 25 we will honour Mbuya Nehanda at corner Julius Nyerere- Samora Machel. There is a church built on a well that Mbuya Nehanda used to fetch water from. Now we have constructed the statue near the church,” he said. President Mnangagwa said Zimbabwe has been honoured by African countries as an African Museum was being constructed in Harare. “Africa agreed that the African Museum be constructed in Zimbabwe. This is the promised land and we have a bright future,” he said.