The Chronicle Chelsea’s players will share a bonus pot of £11million if they complete a Champions League and FA Cup double. Thomas Tuchel’s squad have already earned aggregate bonuses of £5m for reaching the Champions League final for the third time in the club’s history and another £5m will be on the line when they face Manchester City in Istanbul on May 29. In addition the players will split a £1m collective bonus if they beat Leicester in the FA Cup final on May 15. Chelsea run a collective players’ pool, with all bonuses shared equally amongst members of their match-day squad, meaning each player stands to earn around £500 000 if they win the Champions League. This approach contrasts with that favoured by City, who negotiate individual bonuses with each player when they sign their contracts at the club. City’s overall bonus liability is also higher, with the club committed to paying out around £15m in bonuses if they win the Champions League for the first time. The top earners in Pep Guardiola’s squad, such as Kevin De Bruyne, have £1m bonus clauses written into their contracts. Other players will take home a bonus of about £600 000, while fringe squad members are set to receive a lower bonus. Such lavish bonuses pale when set alongside the money Chelsea and City are set to earn for winning the Champions League. The winners will receive a windfall of £100m prize money and broadcast revenue, £16,5m of which is handed out by Uefa just for winning the final alone. Chelsea expect to receive details of ticketing arrangements for the final from UEFA on Thursday, with the European governing body planning to welcome up to 4 000 fans from each club to the Ataturk Stadium as part of a crowd of 25 000. Turkey’s period of lockdown is due to end on May 17 so travelling will not have to quarantine on arrival, but with the country set to be placed on the UK government’s amber list when international travel resumes in 10 days’ time fans will be forced to isolate and take multiple Covid-tests upon their return, which will add considerably to the cost of the trip. Meanwhile, Chelsea will seek clarity on N’Golo Kante’s long-term future as soon as the season is over. The France international remains one of the Blues’ most influential players and is known to have deeply impressed Tuchel since the German’s arrival in January. However, there is some uncertainty over the World Cup winner’s future as he enters the final two years of his deal. Kante turns 31 in March but remains one of the planet’s elite midfielders, however Chelsea would prefer to avoid the scenario of the former Leicester star running his contract down. — Mail