The Chronicle Mkhululi Ncube, Showbiz Reporter
Rhumba fans are in for a mid-year treat as Elvis Nzima and Mxolisi “Mr Bones” Ndlovu are working on a single titled Ibhithani that they are intending to launch in Pretoria, South Africa this Saturday. Ndondofly, as Nzima is known by his fans, fronts Insimbi Zezhwane while Mr Bones leads his Garamtata’s finest. Ndondofly said rhumba fans must expect a well-produced track. “Our fans know what we do when we go to the studio. Ibhithani will not disappoint as I’ve joined forces with Mr Bones and we’re doing this to promote unity among artistes. This is key if we’re to develop Rhumba music and ourselves as artistes,” he said. He urged rhumba fans to unite no matter which band they support saying fighting is not good for music development. By joining forces, Ndondofly said they complement each other well. “As artistes, we don’t challenge each other physically, but through music so that we set high standards. This single is well composed and our fans will definitely enjoy it. I don’t want to spoil the surprise by telling them what the song is about, but those who’ll attend the show will definitely attest,” Ndondofly said. Nzima said this single is a foretaste of the band’s next album which will be out in November. The album will be a follow-up to Imbemba which was released last year. On his part, Mr Bones said collaborating with Insimbi ZeZhwane was good as it was meant to promote the growth of rhumba music. “My wish is for rhumba music to be taken to greater heights and be on the international map. We should be competing with other music genres on the world stage. “Rhumba music must be respected so through such projects, we’re creating building blocks that will spur the genre’s growth,” Mr Bones said. He said the song which they will upload on digital stores in order for it to be accessed by various rhumba fans across the world, was outstanding as they worked with gifted guitarists. Turning to his music, Mr Bones said: “This year, I’ll not be releasing any album, but will work on a video for my last album, Bahleka Behlomile. I’ll also try and market my music more. “For now, my energy is being directed to this single so that my fans are not starved of my music.” — @themkhust.