The Chronicle Mashudu Netsianda, Senior Reporter AGRICULTURAL Technical and Extension Services (Agritex) will soon become a directorate called the Agricultural Advisory Services as part of a major restructuring exercise to help farmers transform from subsistence to commercial players in line with Vision 2030. The Agricultural Advisory Services will have a director for the technical capacitation of farmers and also another one responsible for training. Speaking in Parliament last week, Lands, Agriculture, Fisheries, Water and Rural Resettlement Minister Anxious Masuka said the restructuring process is now at an advanced stage. He said their aim is to turn 1,8 million households from subsistence to commercial farming in line with President Mnangagwa’s vision of transforming the country into an upper-middle income economy by 2030. “Farming ought to transform to become not just a hobby or subsistence and to become a business. It is in this regard that Government is at a very advanced stage of restructuring Agritex,” he said. “The Agritex that we know will be a directorate called Agricultural Advisory Services and underneath it, will be a director for the technical capacitation of farmers and also a director responsible for training.” Dr Masuka said his ministry wants to transform 18 000 A2 farmers into businesspeople and 360 000 A1 farmers to become small and medium enterprises (SMEs). “We want the 1,8 million households to transition from subsistence to commercial farming and it is a journey that we can partake together to transition to that. We want the 18 000 A2 farmers to become businesswomen and businessmen and we want the 360 000 A1 farmers to become SMEs,” he said. Minister Masuka said youth participation is important in the agricultural transformation exercise for the country to attain Vision 2030. “When we are talking of Vision 2030, agriculture is the mainstay of the economy, hence the need to embark on extensive agriculture. Those who should assist farmers are the extension officers and youth are very important in this regard,” he said. “So, it is something that we have started to do and it is something that we need to do in terms of the accomplishment of Vision 2030.” Agritex officers have been capacitated by way of provision of adequate resources to give them the commitment and the strength to do their work and motorbikes to ensure they are mobile. Motorbikes were given to Agritex officers mainly involved in livestock production and farming. The officers are also getting tablets and computers to enable them to do their work and the Ministry was hoping to get 5 000 of them. “In terms of protective clothing, we have availed these, especially in light of Covid-19, they can work without being at risk of contracting Covid-19,” said Minister Masuka. “We have physically motorised them, but we need to motorise them mentally for a change of attitude so that they do not become optional extensionists by transition to business advisors as we commercialise agriculture.” Minister Masuka said they want to capacitate Agritex officers with knowledge to impart to farmers. “That is why we have developed the department of in-service training,” he said. Minister Masuka said his ministry is working on ensuring that extension officers use the motorbikes safely and reduce accidents through training from Central Mechanical and Engineering Department (CMED. “CMED has the expertise in terms of use of vehicles and motorbikes; we have requested that they help our extension officers and we are working with them. We heard that more than 72 extension officers were involved in accidents, “he said. “We are saying one accident is too many. We are working with the CMED who are assisting the extension officers to be able to ride the motorcycles and to be well-versed in the use of the motorbikes for them to do their work well.” @mashnets