The Chronicle THE 2020/21 farming season has been a success for farmers in Zimbabwe as a result of the heavy rainfalls experienced nationwide and the farming guidance offered by several agricultural organisations in the country such as the Zimbabwe Commercial Farmers’ Union (ZCFU). ZCFU is a registered farmers’ Union established back in 1990 when it was still operating as an association. Its aim was to focus on large scale indigenous commercial farmers who entered the business of commercial farming after independence. ZCFU later registered as the Indigenous Commercial Farmers Union in 1996. The union has since changed its name to Zimbabwe Commercial Farmers’ Union (ZCFU), and its mandate now is to serve commercial farmers irrespective of the size of the farm they possess. ZCFU president Dr Shadreck Makombe said the main objective of the Union was to make farming a viable and reliable business through farmer-assistance, as well as ensuring that voices of farmers are heard and answered. ZCFU is one of the organisations which have contributed much in transforming Zimbabwe’s agricultural sector through educating all commercial farmers in new farming technologies. Its work is evident even in this past farming season. Throughout the season, the Union successfully sought ways to assist all commercial farmers in crop production adequate to feed the nation. The ZCFU is looking at ways of investing in innovation and expansion with the aim of feeding Zimbabwe by way of modern technology. This is not determined by the size of the farm but by the use of every resource in a holistic manner to its full capacity. The country made significant strides in maize production and recorded good tobacco sales among other cash crops such as soya beans and cotton. Apart from assisting commercial farmers and ensuring food security for the nation, ZCFU also looks into other ways of continually improving the agricultural sector in the nation. Some of its achievements so far include seeking outside markets for local produce, strengthening the local market as well as improving horticulture through educating farmers in that area. They are also embarking on export market modalities and implementation, as well as strengthening the local market. The ZCFU also provided trainings in horticulture and other spheres of agriculture. The ZCFU has been playing an instrumental role in protecting farmers as the country and the rest of the world fights the Covid-19 pandemic Farmers have been advised on what crops to opt for and on how to handle activities which required physical interactions such as purchasing farming equipment. Through the ZCFU, farmers were advised to reduce the production of perishable crops in line with the dwindling markets. Farmers were also advised not to go en masse to market places but rather look for a few farmers to travel and sell the produce. The ZCFU still encourages farmers to get vaccinated. “We encouraged farmers and are still encouraging them to be vaccinated because a healthy farmer is a productive farmer and that calculates to a productive agricultural industry. We encouraged our farmers to be part and parcel of seminars and meetings to do with Covid-19,” said Dr Makombe. The ZCFU has been assisting and still continues to assist farmers in advocacy for better prices, sound contractual agreements, input price stabilisation, mitigation of debt repayments for and on behalf of farmers. They also engage service providers such as Zinwa, Zera, Zesa and others for good services to its members. With the services offered by organisations such as the ZCFU, the future is bright for Zimbabwe’s agriculture sector. The Union is at present assisting farmers with insights on what crops to focus on. It also continues to advocate for fair and just services on behalf of the farmers and advising them on the new demands brought about by climate change. “We encourage our farmers to take advantage of the wet season and grow cash crops at maximum production so as to feed the nation and save as well as generate foreign currency. We also have successfully lobbied for better prices as announced by the government. As well, we continue to assist farmers under crop management that is planting dates, irrigation scheduling, pest management and rotation, soil fertility testing and control of diseases, insects and weeds,” said Dr Makombe. Farmers who seek ZCFU’s services must reach them at their Head Office situated at 101 Home Industries Cottage, Harare Showgrounds. They can also visit other offices in Mashonaland East and West, Midlands, Matabeleland North and South, Manicaland and Masvingo.