The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
GROWING up, all what Tendai Garwe wished for was to become a pilot as she envied to be a woman in a uniform. She unfortunately found herself in a completely different profession as a radio presenter. Garwe had a stint with ZiFM as a presenter and now calls the shots at Zimpapers Television Network (ZTN) as the features director. Chronicle Showbiz’s Mthabisi Tshuma (MT) caught up with Tendai Garwe fondly known as Sokostina (TG) and she gave a glimpse of her life since childhood. MT: Who is Tendai Garwe and Sokostina. Are they similar? TG: (laughs) l get this question a lot. Tendai and Sokostina co-exist in the same body. Tendai Garwe is the intellect, the mother, strategist,
MT: Where were you born and where did you grow up? TG: I was born in Harare at Mbuya Nehanda Hospital. I am a farm girl and grew up in Nyanga, Chipinge/Chimanimani and Mutare. However, I was in boarding school from the age of five so a lot of growing up happened when I was at school. MT: Which profession did you desire in life? TG: Don’t laugh, I wanted to be a pilot but specifically in the Airforce. I used to day dream about that blue uniform and the beret carefully placed on the side on my head. I wanted to be a girl in uniform. MT: How did you end up in an arts professional career? TG: I have never really considered myself an art professional. Mine is all passion and talent really. I started acting when l was in primary school and was always in the school drama club all the way to college. I am an experienced self-taught actress and MC and l take pride in hits and misses as well. MT: Tell us about your role as ZTN features director? TG: I love it and I am totally in my element. I have the most amazing boss who allows me to express my crazy artistic self. The role is basically to keep Zimbabweans entertained and well informed with programming that is chic and glamorous. Zimpapers TV Network is to me the place to be right now. MT: You wrote a book dedicated to your son, tell us more about it? TG: Yes, A Letter To My Son forty plus one lessons for life and success. I wrote that when I was recovering in hospital. I thought if I had died, I had plenty of things I had not taught my son and it was time I told him. You see, it was a private letter that went public. It was my love offering to my son and of course to all my daughters too. It’s the biggest lessons I personally learnt that I put into nuggets for anyone to use when they face a certain situation. The lessons are timeless but you have to remember I wrote them for the comprehension of a then 15/16-year-old. He is turning 18 but the lessons will be relevant until he turns 100plus. Although it says son it really is for everyone, sons and daughters. This book is my wisdom and truth. At times we don’t know how and what to talk about with our children, this book is a conversation starter. It is being used in some schools for guidance and counselling as well as life skills training. The book is a quick read which can leave you emotional because there are extracts of my journal entry that are shared in the book. The extracts are the experiences I had during my healing journey. I hope you get the chance to read it and get to know me better.-@mthabisi_mthire