The Chronicle Lingani Nyika, Showbiz Reporter
A locally-produced Christian movie titled Salvation, meant to spread the gospel of Christ to communities, that was successfully launched at the Christian Centre in Victoria Falls earlier this week is a must-watch. A vibrant team of more than 20 creative minds worked tirelessly for about four months to produce this inspiring Christian and traditional movie that was shot at Monde Village, a few kilometres from Victoria Falls. Salvation relays a message of the good life one lives when they are saved through Christ, the Saviour who does not discriminate. It is based on a storyline of a young man who came from overseas to preach the gospel to his relatives in Africa. He was sadly captured as a traitor in the land of King Zabul and later praised when he healed a Prince who was ill after the sangoma of the land had failed to heal him. It generally teaches and encourages people to believe and have faith in Christ. The movie which was shot in a rural setup with an African cultural setting conveys the aspects of morality, especially among Zimbabweans. In the movie that promotes local lifestyles and traditions, Ndebele, Tonga and Nambya which are some of the popularly spoken local languages as well as Shona and English were used. The production team showed their amazing talent in the movie which has nothing but the best picture and sound quality. Victoria Falls city fathers, church leaders and community members attended the première on Wednesday in numbers to witness the great work of the city’s up-and-coming actors. Local musicians, Skills Boi, Thakaya, NMC, Godfrey and Madzibaba provided entertainment. The launch of Salvation is confirmation that Victoria Falls youths are eager to grow, not only in tourism, but also in the arts sector as they push to put the city on the map. Producer and director of Salvation, Nigel Zambuko appreciated the whole production team for their co-ordination as well as sponsors like Golden Touch and Pan Africa who made the production a success. He said he hopes to get more help and sponsorship for the next project as they want to promote the arts industry. Zambuko urged the Vic Falls community to support local talent. “As we work on our next project, any financial assistance or equipment from sponsors will be greatly appreciated. The Victoria Falls arts industry is not active because talents are lying idle as a result of lack of support,” he said. Shearwater public relations and corporate affairs manager, Clement Mukwasi commended the team for their wonderful efforts and pledged personal support as well as full support from the tourism industry and others organisations. “At a personal level, I’m going to do my best to assist and also persuade other organisations to help the youths to achieve their goals. The tourism industry will also assist when you work on projects in future,” said Mukwasi. He advised budding actors and artistes to have proper structures. “Many artistes have suffered great losses hence I encourage these actors and artistes to get fair deals from producers and ensure they get real value for their productions. They should also register their intellectual property to avoid losses through piracy.” Pastor Nkosi Masotsha from Christian Centre encouraged Salvation actors to live a righteous and Christian life as they portrayed in the movie so that the community can learn from them. The movie is expected to be sold through DVDs for the convenience of those outside Victoria Falls who could not attend the première. It will also be uploaded on digital platforms. – @NyikaLingani