The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
PREPARATIONS for the third edition of the Miss Teen Intellect Zimbabwe, a national beauty pageant that seeks to raise awareness on the importance of education, are going on well with auditions set to be rolled out countrywide. The pageant which was introduced in 2019 was founded by Jemima Mandemwa, a professional model who is behind the Sanguine Femi clothing line. Mandemwa said preparations are on course with auditions set to start next month. The finale is expected to be held in Harare on December 18. The event will be held under the theme “Nurturing Ladypreneurs,” thus this year’s edition is aimed at nurturing and developing business qualities among young females in Zimbabwe. “The search for the third Intellectual Queen has begun with auditions kick-starting in Bulawayo province on June 11 and 12 at Astrum Technology offices. Matabeleland North will have its auditions on June 19 while those in Midlands will have theirs on July 10. Online auditions will be held for contestants from Matabeleland South, Mashonaland East, West and Central,” said Mandemwa. Online auditions, Mandemwa said will also be conducted for those based in the diaspora. “Last year, through virtual auditions, we had two ladies from the diaspora contesting. This year, once again, we’re opening up the virtual platform to all the young Zimbabwean ladies in the diaspora who want to take part to audition.” From the auditions, 15 aspirants will be selected to compete at the finale taking place in the capital city. Before taking to the ramp, the finalists will check-in for a five-day boot camp. Christine Moyo, the reigning Miss Teen Intellect Zimbabwe said she is excited and looking forward to working, not only with schoolgirls in Zimbabwe but also the group of ladies running for this year’s title. “In addition, she intends to also engage the incoming Miss Teen Intellect Zimbabwe as she believes in the power of teamwork,” Mandemwa said. Sharing the qualities that they are looking for in this year’s queen, Mandemwa said: “The ideal Miss Teen Intellect Zimbabwe should be a young lady with an innovative, open mind who’s willing to learn and share their knowledge with fellow teens.” She went on to call on interested sponsors to come on board. “An exciting year awaits the organisation and we’re open to individuals and companies willing to sponsor this initiative towards building up the young ladies in Zimbabwe to incredible powerhouses,” she said. — @mthabisi_mthire