The Chronicle Ricky Zililo and Innocent Kurira, Sports Reporters
HIGHLANDERS’ woes are piling just two days before they play their opening game in the Chibuku Super Cup against Bulawayo Chiefs at Barbourfields Stadium on Sunday after three players picked up knocks at training. The Bosso squad is already depleted after the club failed to register six new players they signed before the return of football in Zimbabwe.
Bosso signed Joel Ngodzo, Winston Mhango, Keith Mavhunga, Lenox Chikuwa, Peter Muduhwa and Rodi Sibanda but they all couldn’t be registered because they were acquired after the transfer window had closed and their international transfer certificates can’t be obtained until the next transfer window opens on July 1. Their absence leaves Bosso with 20 players, who include three goalkeepers. To further compound their troubles, key players, defensive midfielder Nqobizitha Masuku, right-back Crispen Ncube and central midfielder Devine Mhindirira all sustained knocks at training and have to undergo a late fitness to be included in Sunday’s squad. Despite the setback, Highlanders’ coach Mandla Mpofu put on a brave face at yesterday’s club media briefing, saying his depleted squad is not an excuse for failure. “As the holders, we are under pressure because we have to defend this title. Looking at the group that we are in, it means we are going to play six derby matches and it’s not going to be easy. With the limited arsenal we have right now, we need to push hard. We have injuries in camp, but I think they will recover in time for the Sunday game,” said Mpofu. “As a coach I have to concentrate on players that are eligible to play in the tournament. It’s going to be tough but I will demand results from the boys so that we progress to the next stage. It was not possible to get friendly matches as we wanted, meaning we have to push ourselves and show character,” he said. There will be no fans to cheer on Bosso but Mpofu says his team just has to be good enough on matchday. “The fans give us that extra urge, but we have gone to Harare to play Dynamos and played FC Platinum in Zvishavane without fans. The boys are getting used to it. The important thing is that we must be good as a team. We are a big club and we should go out there and play with or without fans. “After a long break, we have resumed football and since playing Dynamos, I think we have made some good strides in terms of preparations. We really want to compete. Physically we have also made strides. Obviously derbies are difficult but we have prepared well. They (Bulawayo Chiefs) have beaten us and we have beaten them as well. What is important for us is to win our games and progress,” Mpofu said.