The Chronicle Thandeka Moyo-Ndlovu, Health Reporter
KWEKWE is mulling a strict three-week lockdown following an outbreak of the Indian variant of Covid-19 which has been detected in the district. The district Covid-19 rapid response team recommended that the lockdown be imposed immediately to contain the spread of the deadly variant. Part of lockdown recommendation include the immediate ban of weddings, church services and other public and private groupings. All funerals in Kwekwe, under the strict lockdown once approved will be supervised by health workers and should not gather more than 30 people. On Wednesday, the Vice President and Health and Child Care Minister Dr Constatino Chiwenga said the variant had been detected in Kwekwe. The World Health Organisation has said it is reclassifying the highly contagious triple-mutant Covid-19 variant spreading in India as a variant of concern, indicating that it’s become a global health threat. Contacted for comment, Midlands provincial medical director Dr Reginald Mhere said the recommendations had been forwarded to the Ministry and are yet to be adopted. In a statement, the Kwekwe rapid response team said for the variant to be contained, local markets will also be scaled down and religious adherence to Covid-19 regulations including social distancing, handwashing and wearing of masks will be prioritized. “The District has to go into lockdown for 3weeks with effective curfew running from7pm to 6am for a total period of 3 weeks. No visitors to all boarding schools and all-day schools to observe strict Covid-19 school protocols,” said the team. “Starting from tomorrow the May 21, 2021, all contacts will be tested for Covid-19 whether they display any signs and symptoms or not. On discharge of all those who will have tested positive to the Covid-19 virus and have completed 10 days, they will be mandated to be tested again with PCR before they are finally discharged,” read the statement. The team also suggested that opening business hours should run from 8AM to 5PM while bars, drinking places beerhalls and bottle stores remain closed. “Risk communication activities must be upped since we need our communities to be aware of what is going on if at all they are comply with COVID19 regulations. ZUPCO buses to be engaged so that they avoid bus overloading but must maintain social distancing all the time,” said the team. “All health workers (EHTs. Nurses, Lab Staff, and where applicable Community Based Health Workers) who are involved in contact tracing, active case finding, treatment, Lab Tests and risk communication must be tested COVID-19. 13. Kwekwe General Hospital to avail manpower (Doctors and Nurses) to help with sample collection.” The team also requested that district activates all its quarantine, Isolation and treatment centres with imitate effect and these include Medical Centre in Redcliff, Kwekwe General Hospital and Kwekwe City Isolation Disease Hospital. – @thammaoe