The Chronicle Just the other day, I realised how easy it is to walk out of the house in ragged clothes for a “quick” errand. I occasionally buy bread from the local grocery store and often, reports about bread running out, come while I’m in the middle of work, haven’t taken a shower and it’s a quarter to Khaya’s breakfast time. What to do? Throw on a maxi dress, head wrap, flip flops and dash to the shops? Well, I’m not proud to say I’ve done this plenty of times and have often consoled myself by saying, “I’m not getting out of the car so no one will see me”. But that’s not always the case, sometimes you’re forced to get out of the car and yes, the whole of Bulawayo will see you! It’s often not just about the shops, but every other space we have to visit. You tell yourself, “It’s not a big deal” so you can dress any way you want. It initially doesn’t seem like a big deal until you find yourself having to meet the President in ripped jeans. Harare socialite and recently appointed Affirmative Action Group president Mike Chimombe had this embarrassing moment earlier in the month when he found himself at State House meeting President Mnangagwa with his thighs almost bare. People had a go at him for failing to respect the man and his office by showing up in ripped jeans. Some said if he would not be meeting his father-in-law dressed like that, why then did he find it okay to meet the President dressed like he was going to a drag racing event? To his defence, Mike said the meeting was abrupt and he did not get the chance to go home and change before the meeting. Which brings me to my next point. A man of his stature should not have been wearing ripped jeans and a shirt filled with graffiti in the first place. Just like I wouldn’t be caught dead wearing one of those T-shirts with a “DOPE” print on the front. Fine, it was during the weekend and he got audience with President Mnangagwa unexpectedly, but I think he had gotten his wardrobe choices wrong in the first place. Imagine the difference a pair of clean, dark wash Denims and a crisp white shirt would’ve made. The look would’ve still been good for his weekend shenanigans and not entirely a bad outfit to meet the President in. I always say it’s extremely important to get the basics rights. Good jeans, plain white shirt, good neutral colour shoes and a matching belt, neutral colour blazer and you’re set for life. Of course your wardrobe will have many other variations of your choice, but if you have good basics, you’ll never have a hard time layering them. It is important that you understand you are a brand that needs to be guarded jealously. How you look matters, every day, all the time.
My problem is largely with people who drive cars and those that are rather too easy-going for the real world. It’s not cool going to the shops with that worn out brown Berkshire pantyhose filled with bobbles on your head. It’s also not cool going to the corner down your street to buy tomatoes in your nightdress and a drying towel wrapped around your waist. Driving is never an excuse to look rugged. You tell yourself it is okay to wear those old sweat pants and a worn-out T-shirt because you won’t get out of the car. You’re probably even barefoot because you’ll confine yourself to the car during that trip. What happens when you need to get out of the car? I’m not saying run your errands dressed to kill. I’m saying make a conscious effort to dress, at the very least, decently. Don’t be embarrassed to bump into important people because of your wardrobe choices. And you know what, for some reason, on the one day you’re too lazy to dress up you bump into many important people. Rather look on point every other day. Caring about how you dress will always cascade down to when it matters most — weddings, business meetings, parties, national events or any other function which will require you to turn up. We all need to care about the way we look just like how children worry about their images and being laughed at by their friends. Children are the most brutally honest people I know, they’ll tell you when you mess up. But in the adult world, don’t rely on the next person to give you a heads up when you mess up. They’re not as honest and progressive. Your wardrobe malfunction will be the topic of discussion on the unforgiving social networking sites! Until next week, flaunt your pattern and style and don’t forget to catch up with me on Twitter handle @Yoliswa or WhatsApp +263774492700.