The Chronicle Ricky Zililo, Senior Sports Reporter
AMBITIOUS Southern Region Division One League side Talen Vision FC’s capture of veteran striker Mkhokheli Dube is a clear indication that the club is gunning for a Premiership ticket. The 37-year-old announced his surprise move to Talen Vision on Tuesday night, with the club’s marketing and publicity manager Juma Phiri confirming that the forward has signed a one-year deal. Dube joins a host of experienced players at the Golden Boys, as Talen Vision are affectionately known, who have been brought on board to help the side gain promotion into the topflight after losing the 2019 championship to Bulawayo City FC. Former national team, Highlanders, FC Platinum and Bulawayo City gritty defender Zephaniah Ngodzo, ex-Bosso, Bantu Rovers and Chicken Inn striker Obidiah Tarumbwa, who also had playing stints in Belgium and South Africa, as well as winger Canaan Nkomo, who helped Chicken Inn, Hwange and Bulawayo City win promotion to the topflight in the last decade, are all in the books of the ambitious side. Dube is excited by his move to Talen Vision. “Now been given an opportunity to move to an ambitious project where I will join Talent Vision FC; thanking everyone that has made this possible. Together we can do more. Much love, now the grind starts,” Dube wrote on social media. Highlanders wished Dube well and said their door will always be open for a future reunion with the veteran striker. The veteran won three Premier Soccer League titles with Bosso at the beginning of the millennium and another three with FC Platinum. The 37-year-old striker had hoped to retire at his boyhood club Bosso, whom he had reunited with at the beginning of 2020 before the domestic season failed to kick-off due to the Covid-19 enforced lockdown. “We are grateful for the services you offered to the club during your long-playing career, which has been characterised by hard work and discipline. We wish you all the best in your new challenge and leave our door open for another possible reunion in future,” Bosso said in a statement. The experienced striker also had a dance in the United States of America and South Africa during his colourful playing career. – @ZililoR