The Chronicle Oliver Kazunga, Senior Business Reporter
ZIMBABWE and Egypt ambassadors to Zambia have been accredited to the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (Comesa) as permanent representatives of their respective countries to the bloc. The diplomats are Zimbabwe’s ambassador to Zambia, Charity Charamba and Moataz Anwar of Egypt. “Newly appointed ambassadors of Egypt and Zimbabwe to Zambia have been accredited as permanent representatives of their respective countries to Comesa. Her Excellency Charity Angelina Charamba (Zimbabwe) and His Excellency Moataz Anwar (Egypt) presented their letters of credence to the secretary-general of Comesa, Chileshe Kapwepwe on Friday 30 April 2021,” said Comesa in a statement. The two underlined their governments’ commitment to the regional economic bloc given the large market it provides for trade. “Zimbabwe has continued to benefit from the different trade and integration programmes that are being implemented by Comesa with support from co-operating partners such as the European Union,” Ambassador Charamba was quoted as saying. In February, Comesa and Zimbabwe signed an agreement that sub-delegated the implementation of co-ordinated border management activities including the trade and transport facilitation activities at the Chirundu Border Post. The sub-delegated activities are worth Euro 4,1 million and will support the upgrading of priority cross-border infrastructure and equipment at Chirundu Border Post between Zimbabwe and Zambia and enhance trade between the two countries. Amb Anwar commended Comesa for deepening economic integration and promoting regional co-operation among the member States. Ms Kapwepwe appreciated the good working relations with both countries, which has enabled the implementation of country-specific programmes. Through the Comesa Adjustment Facility, the secretariat has helped revive the textile sector by providing financial support and grant to Zimbabwe. On Egypt, Ms Kapwepwe said the country accounts for the largest share of intra-Comesa trade at 28 percent of the total trade. This year, Egypt will host Comesa heads of State and Government Summit. — @okazunga