The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
President Mnangagwa yesterday challenged young people to be proud of the country’s rich history. He said it was unfortunate that there were some Zimbabweans who were denigrating the country’s history, while celebrating that of others. The President commended the Zimbabwe Defence Forces (ZDF) for its commitment to defending constitutionalism. In his address after commissioning 138 graduates during the Parade of Regular Officer Cadet Course 3/37/19 at the Zimbabwe Military Academy (ZMA) in Gweru yesterday, President Mnangagwa urged Zimbabweans to be proud of their history. “I commend the Zimbabwe Defence Forces for its commitment to defend Constitutionalism. It is most unfortunate that among our citizens, we have those who denigrate our own history, national symbols and institutions including the Zimbabwe Defence Forces while celebrating the history of others. “I urge the new officers graduating today and other young people across the spectrum to stand proud of our rich history and who we are as Zimbabweans,” he said. President Mnangagwa urged the graduates to whole-heartedly uphold, preserve and guard the country’s culture and values of Ubuntu/Hunhu. “Always sharpen your knowledge and master your trade. Serve with loyalty, character, discipline and teamwork. Be honest in your dealings and treat people with dignity and respect. “As future leaders, nurture the culture of leading with honour and humility. Never be swayed from this selfless path you have chosen. “Do what is right and shun all forms of indiscipline, corruption and deviant behaviour,” he said. President Mnangagwa said the relationship between Zimbabwe and China continues to grow as evidenced by Beijing’s continued commitment to assisting the country mitigate against the spread of Covid-19 through the provision of vaccine doses and medical consumables. This, he said, will help towards achieving herd immunity in the country. “I want to take this opportunity to express my profound gratitude to the President of the People’s Republic of China, His Excellency, Xi Jinping and the Government of China for the continued generosity and solidarity in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic. “The recent donation from the People’s Liberation Army of 100 000 doses and associated medical consumables for the ZDF is yet another demonstration of the deep, fraternal and strategic nature of relations between our countries,” said President Mnangagwa. He said the Covid-19 pandemic was still in the country and urged the ZDF to remain vigilant by observing the public health protocols. Meanwhile, President Mnangagwa gave a Sword of Honour to the best Cadet Officer Timothy Muyangwa. Cadet Officer Bright Mupanguri was second while two female cadets; Sicebisile Sibanda and Praise Ratisai made it to the top four.