The Chronicle Michael Magoronga, Midlands Correspondent KWEKWE City Council is struggling to clear its arrears to the Zimbabwe Electricity Supply Authority (Zesa), which has since ballooned to $111 million. The power supply authority has given the local authority an ultimatum to offset the debt, failure of which supplies will be cut off. Speaking during a recent full council meeting, Mayor Councilor Angeline Kasipo, said the council was yet to recover from the effects of the Covid-19 induced lockdown, which has resulted in poor cash in-flows. “As it is, we are only collecting about 42 percent of the targeted income and it has become a challenge for us to offer the services effectively. “As a result, we have been failing to settle the Zesa debt hence it has ballooned to this figure. They have written to us giving us an ultimatum to pay or else we risk being cut off,” said Cllr Kasipo. She said power was critical for the pumping of water from the Kwekwe Water Works to residents and companies hence the local authority’s decision to pull all stops to ensure the bill is settled. If cut off, the move may also affect the smooth flow of business in Kwekwe, a mining and industrial hub. Cllr Kasipo said they were also engaging their debtors, chief among them Redcliff Municipality as they seek to boost their coffers. “We also have debtors who owe us a lot and we are trying to engage them so that they can help us out in this situation. As for Redcliff, we are in this together because if we are cut off, they also suffer because we supply them with water,” she said. Redcliff owes Kwekwe $45 million while Government institutions owe a total of $23 million with Zisco owing $16 million. Cllr Kasipo told a Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Local Government that they were facing challenges with state institutions that are not paying their dues. “We are having problems with Government companies and Zisco whose debt was taken over by the Government. We are kindly asking your committee to intervene because we are suffering. I know there might be challenges but we need to help each other out,” she said. Recently the council has been disconnecting water from defaulting residents in a desperate bid to raise the much-needed money. The local authority has also urged those who owe the local authority to approach the authorities and come up with payment plans as they seek to boost their coffers.