The Chronicle Mthabisi Tshuma, Showbiz Correspondent
FAST rising Afro-fusion songstress Noluntu J yesterday offered an Africa Day present to her fans as she dropped the visuals of the hit track Ndlunkulu, that celebrates African women. Ndlunkulu meaning The Queen, is a song that expresses the sassy, bold and fearless side of Noluntu J and also represents the ghetto hustlers from Zimbabwe. The video of Ndlunkulu a first for Noluntu J, (real name Lissa Sibanda) and said the video was shot by Keaitse Films in and out of Bulawayo and celebrates the power of women and being African. Watching the video, one is taken to yesteryear African vibes of walking barefooted, swimming in ponds and donning wear made from animal skins, while contrasting with urban street vibes. The video stars artistes that include Kimoe, Mzistoz Mfanafuthi, MC Troy, Rockie Doub, Skido Flex, Meezy, Steno Kloud9Kats, Adrizzy and Sonnyboy. “The video is filled with scenes that tell the story of an African, mainly a woman who is a Queen and also included in the visuals is street hip hop vibes. Clad in an outfit designed by Bekezela Mlalazi aka Mama kaNicky that I call the Loziba reloaded, I seek to define an entire Queen. “I’m extremely excited and quite nervous since it’s my first musical video and through this debut project, my fans should expect more from me and brace themselves for fireworks because I’m coming bigger and better than before,” said the enthusiastic 20-year-old artiste. Noluntu J started singing in 2017 when she was in a duo with her friend Cripp N and there were hip hop artistes by then. To date, she has three singles under her belt namely AmaNdebele (2018), Ndiyoyika (2020) and Ndlunkulu which was released last year in October. “I started doing music in 2017 and the vision is to represent our African culture and stand strong for women as we want to be heard. “The track Ndlunkulu gives a clear depiction of my goal as it’s a song for confidence for women and shows the power they have in societies as the name Ndlunkulu means The Queen,” said Noluntu J.-@mthabisi_mthire.