The Chronicle Sukulwenkosi Dube-Matutu, Gwanda Correspondent
A SOUTH African company, CapeZim, has set aside about R300 000 towards establishing a milling plant in Insiza District, which is expected to be operational in the next two weeks. CapeZim has partnered with some A2 farmers from Insiza District to revive Artherstone Irrigation Scheme, which had remained under-utilised for decades. The harvest from the irrigation will then be processed at the milling plant and sold to communities. CapeZim director, Mr Louis Le Roux, said they have acquired milling machines with another one expected next week. He said more milling machines were expected as the project grows. The milling plant will be housed at the former Liebiegs Factory premises near West Nicholson. “We saw it crucial to invest in agricultural production in order to ensure food security through irrigation farming,” he said in an interview. “We then saw it even better to go a step further and also have a processing service as well. We will be opening a milling plant trading under the name CapeZim Milling, which is set to be operational in the next two weeks. “For starters we will be milling maize meal, which we will be supplying to the local community and then we will move on to mill fodder.” Mr Le Roux said they will start off with 20 local workers and then recruit more staff as the project grows. “In a few years’ time we want our milling company to become a household name across the nation,” he said. As part of its corporate social responsibility, the company also plans to develop roads and schools within the area. Insiza District Development Coordinator, Mr Zacharia Jusah, said the milling plant was a crucial project as it would ensure effective utilisation of land, job creation and value addition. He said the irrigation and milling plant projects will help alleviate food shortages not only in the district but throughout the province. “With this project we are seeing utilisation of land that has been lying idle both at the irrigation and the factory. Community members will also get employment,” said Mr Jusah. “Already about 80 people have been employed at the irrigation and with the milling plant set to open more will get jobs. “This will also have a huge social impact in the community as people will have access to affordable food. Once mealie-meal is distributed and supplied to local shops it will address the issue of supply and demand and prices will drop. As a district we are witnessing the start of great industrial activity, which will see a huge growth of the district and province,” said Mr Jusah. — @DubeMatutu