The Chronicle Patrick Chitumba, Midlands Bureau Chief
POLICE in Gweru have banned for the next three months, members of the public from carrying machetes and other dangerous weapons, in a bid to reduce murder cases that have been occurring in the area. Midlands provincial police spokesperson, Inspector Emmanuel Mahoko said Gweru Rural District Chief Superintendent Enthia Muzvidziwa has issued the ban under Section 4 of the Maintenance of Peace and Order Act. “This prohibition order has been issued in terms of Section 4 of the Maintenance of Peace and Order Act Chapter 11:23 which says any person failing to comply with such a prohibition shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding level 5 ($30 000) or imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or to both such a fine and imprisonment,” said Insp Mahoko. He said the ban will be effective from Tuesday next week to 16 August. Meanwhile, Insp Mahoko said police are investigating two robbery cases where a man who was in the company of his niece was robbed of cash, cell phones and a motor vehicle by strangers whom he had offered transport along the Gweru- Bulawayo Road. In another incident, he said, a man was robbed at night while he was standing at a hospital in Shurugwi. “Circumstances are that on May 11, at about 11.50pm, the complainant Tamsanqa Sibanda was driving his Honda Fit from Gweru to Bulawayo with his niece (17). He picked the two suspects along Bulawayo road near Bata Shoe Company enroute to Bulawayo,” said Insp Mahoko. He said upon approaching Vungu River one of the suspects allegedly requested for a recess and the driver stopped. “It is alleged that one of the suspects immediately produced an okapi knife, stabbed the complainant on the hand while demanding their valuables and robbed them of US$380 and two Itel cell phones. The complainant and his niece managed to escape leaving the vehicle behind and robbers drove off towards Bulawayo. Total value stolen is US$3 970 and nothing has been recovered,” said Insp Mahoko. He said in an unrelated incident, a 65 -year -old male adult was robbed of his Itel cellphone, black satchel and US$120 by two unknown male adults. “The incident occurred near Zvamabande Hospital Gate, Chachacha in Shurugwi on May 10. The complainant, Paul Rusere was on his way home when he met the two suspects. The suspects allegedly grabbed him and produced a knife demanding cash,” said Insp Mahoko.
He said the suspects searched Rusere and robbed him of his cellphone and cash. “Total value stolen is $1 900 and US$120, nothing has been recovered,” he said. Insp Mahoko said the cases were reported to the police who attended both scenes adding that investigations are in progress and the suspects are still at large. “Police are appealing to anyone with information which may lead to the arrest of suspects in these cases and whereabouts of the blue Honda Fit Registration Number AFL 3532 to report at the nearest police station. Also members of the public are encouraged to avoid moving around with large sums of money on their persons,” he said.